Conference Proceedings of ISEIM 2017 
High Voltage Insulator Surface Evaluation Using 
Image Processing   
 
Damira Pernebayeva, Mehdi Bagheri, and Alex James  
 Electrical and Computer Engineering Department 
 Nazarbayev University 
 damira.pernebayeva@nu.edu.kz 
 
Abstract –High voltage insulators are widely deployed in power 
systems to isolate the live- and dead-part of overhead lines as 
well as to support the power line conductors mechanically. 
Permanent, secure and safe operation of power transmission 
lines require that the high voltage insulators are inspected and 
monitor, regularly. Severe environment conditions will 
influence insulator surface and change creepage distance. 
Consequently, power utilities and transmission companies face 
significant problem in operation due to insulator damage or 
contamination. In this study, a new technique is developed for 
real-time inspection of insulator and estimating the snow, ice 
and water over the insulator surface which can be a potential 
risk of operation breakdown. To examine the proposed system, 
practical experiment is conducted using ceramic insulator for 
capturing the images with snow, ice and wet surface conditions. 
Gabor and Standard deviation filters are utilized for image 
feature extraction. The best achieved recognition accuracy rate 
was 87% using statistical approach the Standard deviation. 
Keywords: insulator, image processing, inspection technique, 
Gabor filter, Standard deviation, k-NN classifier 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
In severe cold climate conditions, the properties of 
electrical high-voltage overhead insulator surface tend to 
deteriorate due to the accumulation of ice and snow in 
combination with strong wind. There are two main concerns 
related to icing effect: the weight of ice and the conductivity 
of water. The accumulated ice leads to flashover as it reduces 
dramatically the insulator leakage distance [1]. Icing related 
insulator faults have proved to result in power outages across 
the world including Canada, Norway, Japan, the US and UK 
[1].  The timely inspection of insulator surface is an important 
procedure to identify the early stage of aging and deformation 
occurring in severe environmental conditions. 
This study uses the Gabor and Standard deviation filters 
with the k-NN classifier to assess the condition of insulator 
surface by determining the present of ice, snow and water 
using images. These two filters are applied to extract the 
features from the images of insulator surface. The images are 
prepared using the ceramic insulator under winter conditions: 
snow, ice and melt water. The database was created by 
acquiring the images with three classes. The k-NN classifier 
is utilized to assess the classification accuracy of identifying 
nature of insulator surfaces. Results obtained from 
sumalitions  show the potential of use of image filtering 
techniques to extract useful features for assess the insulator 
surfaces. 
This paper is organized as follows. In section II insulator 
types and insulator inspection methods are discussed. In 
section III the proposed system is introduced including: 
Image analysis and Classification, Feature extraction, and the 
k-nearest neighbour classifier. Results and Analysis are 
discussed in section IV and  the conslusion is given in 
section V.  
II. TYPES OF INSULATOR AND INSPECTION TECNIQUES 
A. Types of Insulators  
High Voltage (HV) insulators provide mechanical 
support for the transmission line conductors and prevent the 
current flow from conductors to the earth. HV insulators are 
classified based on how they supposed to be used on power 
lines. Their classification can be based on their electrical, 
mechanical and environmental service stresses.  
Ceramic, toughened glass, and polymers are commonly 
used materials for high voltage insulator fabrication. 
Desirable resistivity is considered as the main advantage in 
ceramic and glass insulators, however, poor hydrophobicity 
vulnerability to fend contamination are considered as the 
main disadvantages. In contrast, the polymer insulators are 
lighter than ceramic insulators with higher surface 
hydrophobicity. However, they tend to age fast and have 
lower withstanding to mechanical loads compared to ceramic 
insulators.  
There are several types of insulators such as pin type 
insulator, post insulators, suspension type and strain 
insulators that are widely deployed in electric power 
distribution system [2]. Characteristics of listed insulators are 
briefly presented in Table I. 
TABLE I.  INSULATOR TYPES [2] 
Insulator type Operating 
Voltage 
Device description 
Pin type 
insulators 
 less than 33kV Economic and efficient; it can 
withstand against wind, and 
mechanical stress 
Post insulator up to 33 kV Used for supporting bus bars 
and disconnecting switches in 
sub stations 
Suspension 
insulator 
 each unit designed 
for 11 kV 
Consists number of porcelain 
discs connected in series in 
form of a string; the number 
of insulator discs in a string 
depends on operating voltage. 
It is cheaper for operating 
voltage above 33kV, less 
mechanical stress. It is 
cheaper for operating voltage 
above 33kV, less mechanical 
stress. 
 
 
 
Conference Proceedings of ISEIM 2017 
B.  Insulator monitoring methods  
The regular checking of insulators on overhead lines is 
quite a challenge due to the height of towers, location of 
power lines (mountains, terrains and other non-accessible 
places) and voltage applied across the insulators. Therefore, 
researchers have recently focused on the development of 
remote and automated inspection techniques using signal 
processing. The various methods, based on laboratory 
experiments and in-the-field tests, have been proposed to 
inspect the insulator. In [3], the Hough transform line 
detection method has been proposed to study the insulator tilt 
affects using morphological operations. The fault detection 
accuracy was performed by using feature extraction 
technique the Gray-level-Co-occurrence matrices (GLCM) 
form airborne images.  There is also an attempt to use fast 
Fourier transform (FFT)-based spectral analysis to examine 
the polluted surface condition of insulator [4]. Another work 
evaluates the hydrophobicity of the insulator surface using 
the co-occurrence matrix to extract the features from the 
binary images [5]. The remote condition monitoring of 
insulator has been proposed by [6] where the adaptive neuro-
fuzzy inference system and SMV have been used to 
determine the condition of the insulator. 
 
Table II describes the summary review on the insulator 
diagnostic methods with their advantages and limitations.  
TABLE II.  INSULATOR INSPECTION METHODS 
Insulator inspection 
Methods 
Advantages Limitations 
A computational 
electric field approach [7] 
evaluates the condition 
of an insulator and 
detect internal defects 
not accurate for 
internal cracks 
Infrared and 
ultraviolet imaging 
technique [8] 
detects the temperature 
variance caused by 
internal cracks 
high cost, limited 
number of 
conditional 
defects; sensitive 
to the 
environment 
Harmonic retrieval method 
[3] 
remote inspection 
based on analysis of 
the low frequency 
even-order harmonic 
of the basic power line 
transmission frequency 
(60 Hz), can be used in 
the high voltage power 
lines 
high cot, time 
consuming 
Watershed algorithm 
technique [9] 
detection of the dirt 
area in the images of 
the insulator surface  
sensitive to small 
changes, over-
segmentation 
phenomena 
Hough transform line 
detection method [3] 
insulator tilt correction 
based on Hough 
transform technique; 
stable and robust to 
noises in images 
error in tilt angle 
calculation 
Insulator Hydrophobicity 
inspection [5] 
the polynomial 
classifier performs 
high classification 
accuracy  
applicable for a 
small class 
number due to its 
computation 
complexity. 
   
III. IMAGE ANALYSIS AND CLASSIFICATION 
 
 
A  
B  C  
 
 
The insulator inspection through the analysis of images is 
performed using the set of steps shown in in Fig. 2. In the 
image acquisition stage, a database of insulator images 
covered by snow, ice and sprayed water are prepared. This 
dataset contains of 377 images with 3 classes. To reduce the 
storage computational complexity, the original RGB images 
obtained by the camera were downsized by cropping square 
segments of size 64x64 pixels and converted into grayscale.  
The data set was divided into train and test set, selected 
randomly, for testing the classification accuracy. The 
samples of the insulator covered with snow, ice and water 
are illustrated in Fig. 1. 
 
A. Feature extraction 
Feature extraction is the process of identifying useful 
features that can often reduce the dimension of features using 
a feature transform. The extracted features are expected to 
contain discriminatory information of the input data useful 
for classification purposes. For this work, a comparison is 
drawn between two different biologically inspired techniques 
like Gabor and Standard deviation filters. Two techniques for 
image analysis and feture extraction were used.  
Gabor filter has been known as useful tool in image 
processing due to its similarity with the human visual 
system. In general, Gabor filter is a linear filter used for 
image texture and edge detection analysis. Basically, it is a 
two dimensional, frequency and orientation sensitive band 
  
With ice 
  
With snow 
  
 
with sprayed water 
 
Figure 1.  Insulator image samples 
 Figure 2. Segmented: A. snow, B. water, C ice 
Conference Proceedings of ISEIM 2017 
pass filter, formed by sinusoids and Gaussians function (1). 
It has been widely used in many different applications such 
as: edge and object detection, fingerprint recognition, 
biometrics, medical and biological applications [10, 11, 12]. 
In general, the principal work of the filter is that image 
patterns are convolved with the Gabor filters using different 
preferred spatial frequencies and orientations to evaluate 
their similarities. Each wavelet captures energy at a specific 
frequency and direction which provide a localized frequency 
as a feature vector  
?
??
??
?
??
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
cossin
sincos
)2cos(
2
1
exp(),(
2
2
2
2
?????
????
????
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
??
yxy
yxx
xf
yx
yxF
 
??? 
 
 
where the filter is described by the following parameters ?x 
and ?y –sigma, represent the standard deviation of Gaussian 
envelope in X and Y direction and controls the width of 
Gaussian envelope, ? – theta, this is the rotation for the filter 
related to x-axis,  -is the frequency of a sinusoidal plane 
wave.    
The standard deviation filter is a statistical approach 
where the filter substitutes the original pixel-value with a 
standard deviation window mask in an area around the pixel 
[13]. This operation resembles the human eye sensory 
filtering process resulting in edges of different strengths 
determined by the window size. Three window masks 3x3, 
5x5, 7x7 are applied to get feature vectors for all images.  
? ??
N
i
ix
N
)(
1
??  
???????????????????????????????? 
A. Classification 
The purpose of classification process is to categorize 
certain pixels of the feature vectors in digital image into one 
of class labels. The k-NN classifier has been widely used for 
statistical estimation and pattern recognition. It basically 
performs the similarity measurements for the matching the 
feature vectors of train set images with tested set. The 
measurement is done by summing up the difference S?  
between extracted feature Fq of test set and Fp of train set (3) 
[15].  
In the experiment, the dataset consists of 377 images 
divided into 3 class labels including snow, ice and water 
(Fig. 3). The interest regions in the input images are cropped 
by the size64x64 pixels to reduce computation time and 
divided into train and test set, selected randomly. When the 
feature vectors are created for all images in database, the k-
nearest neighbor (k-NN) distance based classifier algorithm 
is used. 
? ???
n
i
qp iFiFS ))()(( , where i=1, 2, .., n 
????????
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Flowchart of image recognition steps performed 
IV. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 
 
In this study, two feature extraction algorithms are 
successfully tested using the insulator surface image dataset, 
which consists of 377 images with 3 classes: ice, snow and 
water (Fig. 3). In Fig. 4 and 5, the error bar graphs represent 
the performance of the k-NN classifier based on the 
extracted features using the Gabor and standard deviation 
filters, respectively. The graphs are constructed using mean 
and standard deviation. In Fig.4 and 5, the standard deviation 
increases with the increase of the number of training 
samples. Basically, standard deviation takes square root of 
variance, which measures the distance between points. The  
recognition accuracy using the standard deviation filter 
performs better results than the Gabor filter, 86% and 59%, 
respectively.  
 
 
Figure 4. Recognition accuracy for three classes using Gabor filter 
Image Acquisition 
 
Image pre-processing 
 (Cropping ROI with 64x64 pixel size) 
 
Feature extraction using Gabor 
filer and Standard deviation filer 
Image classification using k-NN 
classifier 
 
Recognition 
accuracy 
 
Conference Proceedings of ISEIM 2017 
 
Figure 5. Recognition accuracy for three classes using Standard deviation 
V. CONCLUSION 
In this paper two feature extraction techniques including the 
Gabor and Standard deviation filters were examined for 
insulator surface evaluation. The obtained feature vectors 
were utilized using the k-nearest neighbor classifier. The 
results of the system were based on 377 images acquired and 
pre-processed from the surface of the ceramic insulator under 
winter conditions. Three classes with surface covered with 
snow, ice and water were used to estimate the recognition 
accuracy of the system. The recognition accuracy based on 
standard deviation performs better results comparing to 
Gabor filter. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1]  “Coating for protecting overhead power power network equipment in 
winter conditions”, 2015.  
[2] Zhang, X., and Chen, F. “ A Method of Insulator Fault Detection from 
Airborne Images”, Second WRI Global Congress on Intelligent 
Systems, 2010. 
[3] Han, S., Hao, R., Lee, J., & Member, S. “Inspection of Insulators on 
High-Voltage Power Transmission Lines”, IEEE Transactions on 
Power Delivery, 2009, pp 2319–2327.  
[4] Chandrasekar, C. M. S. “Adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system for 
monitoring the surface condition of polymeric insulators using 
harmonic content” IET Generation, Transmission and Distribution, 
2010, pp751–759.  
[5] Wang, Z., Yu, Z., Xu, J., Wang, X., Yu, H., Zhao, D., & Han, D.). 
“High Voltage Transmission Lines Remote Distance Inspection 
System”, IEEE International Conference on Mechatronics and 
Automation 2015,pp 1676–1680. 
[6] Kontargyri, V. T., Gonos, I. F., Stathopulos, I. A., & Alex, M. 
“Simulation of the Electric Field on High Voltage Insulators using the 
Finite Element Method”, 12th Biennial IEEE Conference on Electrical 
Field Computation, 2006,. 
[7] Fang-cheng, L., Hu, J., Sheng-hui, W., & Hai-de, L. (2012). “Fault 
Diagnosis Based on Ultraviolet Imaging Method on Insulators”, 1426–
1429.  
[8] Khalayli, L., Sagban, H. Al, Shoman, H., Assaleh, K., & El-hag, A. 
(2013). Automatic Inspection of Outdoor Insulators using Image 
Processing and Intelligent Techniques, Electrical Insulation 
Conference,  2013,pp 206–209. 
[9] Xin, M., Tiecheng, L., Xiaoyun, W., & Bo, Z. “Insulator Surface Dirt 
Image Detection Technology Based on Improved Watershed 
Algorithm”,Asia-Pacific Power and Energy Engineering Conference, 
2012. 
[10] Kamarainen, J.-K., Kyrki, V., & Kalviainen, H. (2006). Invariance 
properties of Gabor filter-based features-overview and applications. 
IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 15(5), 1088–1099.  
[11] Liu, S. L., Niu, Z. D., Sun, G., & Chen, Z. P. (2014). Gabor filter-
based edge detection: A note. Optik, 125(15), 4120–4123.  
[12] Liu, C. L., Koga, M., & Fujisawa, H. (2005). “Gabor feature extraction 
for character recognition: Comparison with gradient feature.” 
Proceedings of the International Conference on Document Analysis 
and Recognition, ICDAR, 2005, 121–125.  
[13] Technology, A. I., & Baharudin, B. Bin. “Mean and standard deviation 
featurs of color historgram using laplacian filter for content based 
image retrieval”, Journal of Theoretical and Applied Information 
Technology 34(1), 2011. 
[14] Randen,T, J.H Husoy. “Filtering for Texture Classification?: A 
Comparative Study”, IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and 
Machine Intelligence, 1999, pp291–310. 
 
 
 
 
 
