1 
Author version of accepted article: 
Cite as 
Niazi, Muaz, and Amir Hussain. "Agent-based computing from multi-agent systems to 
agent-based models: a visual survey." Scientometrics 89.2 (2011): 479.  
2 
 
Agent-based computing from multi-agent 
systems to agent-based Models: a visual 
survey 
Muaz Niazi1,2 and Amir Hussain2 
1Department of Computer Science, 
COMSATS Institute of IT, 
Islamabad, 
Pakistan  
2Institute of Computing Science and Mathematics,  
School of Natural Sciences, 
University Of Stirling,  
Scotland, UK 
Emails: muaz.niazi@gmail.com,  ahu@cs.stir.ac.uk 
1 
Agent-Based Computing is a diverse research domain concerned with the building of intelligent 
software based on the concept of "agents". In this paper, we use Scientometric analysis to analyze 
all sub-domains of agent-based computing. Our data consists of 1,064 journal articles indexed in the 
ISI web of knowledge published during a twenty year period: 1990-2010. These were retrieved using 
a topic search with various keywords commonly used in sub-domains of agent-based computing. In 
our proposed approach, we have employed a combination of two applications for analysis, namely 
Network Workbench and CiteSpace - wherein Network Workbench allowed for the analysis of 
complex network aspects of the domain, detailed visualization-based analysis of the bibliographic 
data was performed using CiteSpace. Our results include the identification of the largest cluster 
based on keywords, the timeline of publication of index terms, the core journals and key subject 
categories. We also identify the core authors, top countries of origin of the manuscripts along with 
core research institutes. Finally, our results have interestingly revealed the strong presence of agent-
based computing in a number of non-computing related scientific domains including Life Sciences, 
Ecological Sciences and Social Sciences. 
  
                                                 
1 This is the author version of the paper. Citation of the published paper is as follows:  
Muaz Niazi & Amir Hussain (2011), Agent-based Computing from Multi-agent Systems to Agent-
Based Models: A Visual Survey, Springer Scientometrics, 89(2), 479-499 
DOI:10.1007/s11192-011-0468-9 
http://www.springerlink.com/content/c3g15318738w0710/  
3 
Keywords Scientometrics, Visualization, Agent-based Modeling, Multiagent 
Systems, Individual-based Modeling, CiteSpace 
Introduction 
Agent-based Computing(Jennings 1999a; Wooldridge 1998) is a large and 
widely spread scientific domain. An agent can range from a “software agent” or 
“service/daemon”, which might not behave very intelligently to an intelligent agent, 
which is based on models of artificially intelligent behavior (Wooldridge 2009; 
Weiss 1998). An agent could even be a representation of an interacting social 
component of a large system used to explore emergent global behavior in a 
simulation(Gilbert and Troitzsch 2005; Muaz A Niazi and Amir Hussain 2011). 
Agent design and simulation go hand in hand but in completely different 
ways in different sub-domains of agent-based computing. So, e.g. on one hand, 
there are researchers whose research goals revolve around the design of various 
types of agents where the role of simulation is closely linked to validation of the 
future operation of actual or physical agents(Bellifemine et al. 2001). On the other, 
there are researchers, whose goal is not agent-design but rather the agent-design is 
a means of developing simulations which can lead to better understanding of global 
or emergent phenomena associated with complex adaptive systems(Macal and 
North 2007; M. A. Niazi and A. Hussain 2011).  
This broad base of applications of this research area thus often leads to 
confusions regarding the exact semantics of various terms in the literature. This is 
perhaps tied closely to the evolution of “agent-based computing” into a wide 
assortment of communities. These communities have at times, perhaps nothing 
other than the notion of an “agent” in common with each other.  
What makes the study of this domain even harder is related closely with the 
keywords used by the researchers. Not only are the application domains varied, 
Agent-based modeling (Axelrod 1997) is at times confused with similar but actually 
somewhat different sub-domains such as multiagent systems (Lesser 2007) in the 
domain of Artificial Intelligence. While at other times, agent-based modeling is 
referred by completely different keywords but with synonymous meanings such as 
“Individual-based modeling”. However, all of these eventually tie in together in the 
domain of agent-based computing (Wooldridge 1998; Jennings 1999b). And it is 
not uncommon to get unexpected results from papers where the use of the word 
4 
“agent” in completely different contexts such as in Biology or Chemistry or other 
domains (Snead et al. 1995; Dydenko et al. 2005) where the use is completely 
unrelated to agent-based computing.  
While Agents and multi-agent systems from the AI perspective are not less 
important in any way, agent-based modeling and simulation paradigm (ABM) has 
even been termed a revolution in the esteemed journal Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences (Bankes 2002). ABM has found parallel applications in 
numerous domains as diverse as the Social Sciences(Epstein and Axtell 1996) to 
Biological Sciences (Gonzalez et al. 2003; Siddiqa et al. 2009; Mukhopadhyay et 
al. 2010), to Environmental modeling(Muaz Niazi et al. 2010; Xiaofei 2010). It is 
even prevalent in the modeling of business systems(Aoyama 2010) and recently in 
the modeling of Computational Systems such as in Wireless Sensors (Muaz Niazi 
and Hussain 2010) and ad-hoc Networks (Muaz  Niazi and Hussain 2009).  
The goal of this paper is to use citation analysis and visualization to give a 
scientometric overview and survey of the diversity and spread of the domain across 
its various sub-domains, in general, and to identify key concepts, which are mutual 
to the various sub-domains, in particular. These includes identifying such visual 
and scientometric indicators as the identification of the core journals, key subject 
categories, the top and most highly cited authors, the Institutes and also the 
countries of manuscript origin. 
The structure of the rest of the paper is as follows: First we give a brief 
background of Visualization techniques in Scientometrics. This is followed by data 
collection and methodology. Next, we present the results of the study and finally 
we conclude the paper. 
Background  
Scientometrics  
Scientometrics (Leydesdorff 2001) is the quantitative study of scientific 
communication. Scientometrics requires the use of a multitude of sophisticated techniques 
including Citation Analysis, Social Network Analysis and other quantitative techniques for 
mapping and measurement of relationships and flows between people, groups, 
organizations, computers, research papers or any other knowledge-based entities.  
5 
Domain Visualization 
Domain visualization is a relatively newer research front. The idea is to use 
information visualization to represent large amounts of data in research fronts(Chen et al. 
2001).  This allows the viewer to look at a large corpus and develop deeper insights based 
on a high level view of the map(Card et al. 1999). Visualization using various network 
modeling tools has been performed considerably for social network analysis of citation and 
other complex networks(H. White and K. McCain 1998).  
  Various types of scientometric analyses have been recently performed for domains 
such as HIV/AIDS (Pouris and Pouris 2010), Scientometrics (Hou et al. 2008), Mexican 
Astronomers(Sierra-Flores et al. 2009), scientific collaborations (Barabási et al. 2002) and 
engineers in South Africa (Sooryamoorthy 2010). Extensive work on research policy has 
been performed by Leydesdroff (Etzkowitz and Leydesdorff 2000). In addition, network 
analysis techniques have been proposed in (Park et al. 2005; Park and Leydesdorff 2008) 
Recently however, with newer free tools such as the CiteSpace (Chen 2006), 
researchers have performed information visualization to identify various patterns in 
complex domains of scientific literature. Some of the recent studies in this direction include 
visualization of the HCI domain(Chen et al. 2006), identification of the proximity clusters 
in dentistry research(Sandström and Sandström 2007), visualization of the pervasive 
computing domain(Zhao and Wang 2010), visualization of international innovation 
Journals(Chun-juan et al. 2010) as well as identification of trends in the Consumer 
Electronics Domain(M. Niazi and A. Hussain 2011). 
Scientometric studies which combine co-citation analysis with visualizations 
greatly enhance the utility of the study. They allow the readers to quickly delve into the 
deeper aspects of the analysis. Co-citation analysis deals with the measurement of 
proximity of documents in various scientific categories and domain. These analyses include 
primarily the author co-citation analysis and the journal co-citation analysis. Here, the 
Journal co-citation analysis identifies the role of the primary journals in the domain. In 
contrast, the author co-citation analysis(White and Griffith 1981) especially by  using 
visualization(H. D. White and K. W. McCain 1998) offers a view of the structures inside a 
domain. The idea is that the more frequently two authors are cited together, the closer the 
scientific relation between them. Whereas document co-citation maps co-citations of 
individual documents (Small 1973; Small and Griffith 1974; Griffith et al. 1974), author 
co-citation focuses on body of literature of individual authors. In addition, co-citation 
cluster analysis of documents is useful for the display of macro-structural scientific 
knowledge evolution. In initial cluster analysis, techniques involved clustering highly cited 
documents by single-link clustering and then clustering the resultant clusters up to four 
6 
times(Small 1993). Recent techniques involve the use of computational algorithms to 
perform this clustering. These clusters are then color coded to reflect that.  
In this article, we present a visualization based systematic domain analysis of the 
inter-disciplinary nature of agent-based computing. This involves the discovery of various 
types of co-citation networks as well as the complex network analysis of the overall 
network using two different tools based on their relative strengths; Network Work Bench 
(Pullen 2000; Team 2006) for performing a Complex Network Analysis using Network 
Analysis Toolkit and CiteSpace(Chen 2006). 
The objectives of this study can be summarized as following: 
• To identify the largest clusters of inter-connected papers for the discovery 
of complex interrelations of various sub-areas of agent-based computing. 
• To discover “bursts”(Barabasi 2005; Barabási and Gelman 2010) of topics 
along with a timeline of publication of the index terms used. 
• Identification of the core journals for the whole of agent-based computing 
ranging from agents, multi-agent systems to agent-based and individual-
based simulations, in terms of citations of articles. 
• Identification of the key subject categories. 
• Identification and study of the most productive authors, institutes and 
countries of manuscript origins.  
Methodology 
Data collection  
The input data was retrieved from the Thomson Reuters web of 
knowledge(Reuters 2008).  A thorough topic search for data was devised to cater 
for various aspects and keywords used in agent-based computing in the following 
three sub-domains: 
1. Agent-based, multi-agent based or individual-based models 
2. Agent-oriented software engineering  
3. Agents and multi-agent systems in AI 
The search was performed in all four databases of Web of Science namely SCI-
EXPANDED, SSCI, A&HCI, CPCI-S for all years. Details of the search have been 
provided in the Appendix.  For the sake of analysis, the range of years 1990-2010 
was selected with search limited to only Journal articles. Bibliographic records 
retrieved from SCI include information such as authors, titles, abstracts as well as 
7 
references. The addition of cited references resulted in a total of 32, 576 nodes. The 
details of the search keywords along with a reasoning for the selection are given in 
the Appendix.  
Research methodology tools 
We chose two different tools for the analysis. The reason for this selection 
was two-fold; firstly that way we can capitalize on the strengths of each of these 
and secondly, this allows for cross-validation of results by comparison of the 
outputs from the two tools. The first tool was  the Network WorkBench (Pullen 
2000), which is considered a strong complex network analysis tool and was 
primarily used for global network analysis. The second was CiteSpace (Chen 2006), 
a recent tool which has been designed exclusively for Citation Networks Analysis. 
We used CiteSpace as the key visualization tool for our study.   
Network workbench is a general purpose tool which is able to visualize, 
generate and analyze various types of complex networks. It has a specially 
developed interface for scientometric analysis(LaRowe et al. 2009; Börner et al. 
2006). It is able to extract almost 8 types of citation networks from ISI text data. 
These include directed, paper citation, author-paper, co-occurrence, word co-
occurrence, co-author, reference co-occurrence and document co-citation networks. 
Subsequently it can be used to perform analysis as well as for the visualization of 
networks. One key ability of Network Workbench is the fact that it can pre-process 
data (e.g. by reducing the number of nodes for analysis of important features) and 
can be used to manipulate networks using GUESS(Adar 2006). 
CiteSpace, on the other hand, is custom designed for Citation Analysis 
visualization. By color coding the evolution of research, it allows examination of 
some details which cannot otherwise be easily captured using other tools. As an 
example, as shown by Chen in (Chen 2006), using color-coded time slicing, it can 
be used to identify papers which tie in two different research fronts. 
Results  
We start with a basic look at the overall picture of articles retrieved from the 
Web of Science. As can be seen in Figure 1, the articles in this domain start 
primarily during the early 1990’s and gradually keep rising and as such reach a total 
of 148 articles published merely in the last year 2009.  
8 
 
Figure 1 Articles published yearly 
In addition, since the popularity of a domain is known to be based on its 
number of citations, we need to observe this phenomena closely. It can be observed 
in the graph using data from the Web of Science in Figure 2. Thus, starting from a 
very small number of citations, Agent-based computing has risen to almost 1630 
citations alone during the year 2009. 
 
Figure 2 Citations per year 
Analysis using NWB 
Next, to get the big picture of the citation network, a network (paper co-
citation network) was extracted from the ISI records using Network Workbench 
tool. In addition, analysis was performed for the extracted network using NWB 
based Network Analysis Toolkit (Sedgewick and Schidlowsky 2003). The extracted 
global properties of the network are shown in Table 1: 
9 
Table 1 Basic Network Analysis of Extracted Paper Citation Network 
Attribute Value 
Nodes: 32, 576 
Isolated nodes: None 
Edges: 39, 096 
Self Loops None 
Parallel Edges None 
Edge Attributes None 
Valued Network No 
Average total degree: 2.400 
Weakly Connected No 
Weakly connected components 78 
Largest connected component 
Size 
31, 104 nodes 
Density (disregarding weights): 0.00004 
The first thing to note here is the number of nodes. The number of nodes is 
32, 576 and the reason it is much larger than reported above is that the Web of 
Science data includes the cited references as well as the original nodes. Now, we 
see here that there are no isolated nodes, which is obvious because every paper will 
at least cite some other papers at the very least. This is followed by the 39, 096 
edges. Another interesting feature is the average degree, which we see is 2.4. The 
fact that the average degree is not significantly higher shows actually that a large 
number of papers have been co-cited in this corpus otherwise the degree would have 
been much higher.  
The graph itself is not weakly connected but it consists of 78 weakly 
connected components with a largest component of size 31,104 nodes. The weakly 
connected components are formed based on articles connected with a small number 
of other articles identifying the importance of these papers (Which shall be 
investigated in depth later on in this paper). Finally, we note that the density is 
0.00004 however knowing the density does not give much structural information 
about the Scientific domain per se. These properties are a characteristic of the 
retrieved empirical data. However, we note here that while interesting, they do not 
provide in depth insights of the data. So we perform a further set of analysis using 
NWB 
10 
Here we examine the structure of the overall agent-based computing domain 
further using NWB. To allow for the examination of the domain using the specific 
strengths, central to the NWB tool, we extracted the top nodes with an arbitrary 
number of local citation count > 20. Subsequently the network was visualized using 
GUESS(Adar 2006) and nodes were resized according to the values of the citation 
count. The result can be observed in Figure 3. Here we can note the peculiar relation 
of some of the top papers connected with Volker Grimm’s paper in the center. Apart 
from Grimm’s own papers, these include Robert Axelrod’s as well as Parker’s and 
Deangelis’s works. 
 
Figure 3 Top papers with citations > 20 
In addition, we can note that here Kreft’s and Huston’s work in 
Microbiology and Biosciences as well as Wooldridge’s and Ferber’s work in the 
domain of multiagent systems are also showing up. For futher analysis, we move 
on to the more advanced Information Visualization tool, namely CiteScape.  
CiteScape 
The CiteScape tool allows for a variety of different analysis. CiteScape 
directly operates on the downloaded ISI data and builds various networks using 
time slicing. Subsequently using the various options selected by the user, the 
network can then be viewed in different ways and parameters can be analyzed based 
on centrality (betweenness) as well as frequency.  
11 
Identification of the largest cluster 
The goal of our first analysis was to observe the big picture and identify the 
most important indexing terms. Based on a time slice of one year, here in Figure 4, 
we see the largest cluster.  
These clusters are formed using CiteSpace, which analyzes clusters based 
on time slices. Here the links between items show the particular time slices.  
  
 
Figure 4 Largest Cluster based on indexing terms 
 
In this figure, we first note the top where the year slices from 1990 to 2010 
show up in 4 year slices. Using different colors in CiteSpace allows us to clearly 
identify turning points and other interesting phenomena in literature. We notice here 
that one of Grimm’s papers is actually the key turning point from Agent-based 
Modeling to Multiagent-systems cluster. Another thing that can be noted here is the 
role of this paper in connecting a large number of papers in 2010 to the other papers 
in  2002-2006 era showing a somewhat delayed acceptance of the concepts.  
Timeline and bursts of index terms 
The next analysis performed was to observe the clusters on a timeline as 
shown in Figure 5. 
In complex networks, various types of centrality measures such as degree 
centrality, eccentricity, closeness and shortest path betweenness centralities etc. 
Grimm’s Ecological Modeling paper 
12 
Citespace, in particular, uses betweenness centrality(Chen 2006). This particular 
centrality is known to note the ability of a vertex to monitor communication 
between other vertices. In other words, a higher centrality ensures that the vertex is 
between more of the shortest paths between other nodes relative to other nodes with 
lower centrality. 
Using a time line especially helps identify the growth of the field. Please 
note here that these includes papers which are based on agent-based computing as 
well as papers which are cited by these papers. Here, the red items are the “bursts”. 
Bursts identify sudden interest in a domain exhibited by the number of citations. 
We can see that there are a lot of bursts in the domain of agent-based model.  
In addition, even our preliminary analytics and visualization here confirms the 
hypothesis that agent-based computing has a very wide spread article base across 
numerous sub-domains. This is obvious here as we see clusters ranging from 
“drosophila” and “yellow perch bioenergetics” to those based on “group decision 
support systems”, all ranging from different domains. Further analysis in the paper 
strengthens this initial point of view based on an examination of the various clusters.  
Here, the results demonstrate the effects of the semantic vagueness 
discussion earlier in the paper. So, e.g. Where concepts such as group decision 
support system, rule-based reasoning and coordination are concepts tied closely 
with developing intelligent agents, they also show up in the domain right along side 
agent-based modeling.  
 
 
Figure 5 Timeline view of terms and clusters of index terms (based on centrality) also 
showing citation bursts  
 
13 
Analysis of Journals 
Our next analysis was to identify the key publications of the domain2. This 
can be seen in Figure 6. Here the key journals are identified based on their 
centrality. 
Once again, we can note here that the vagueness in the terms of use again 
shows up in the set of mainstream Journals of the domain with “Artificial 
Intelligence” and “Communications of the ACM” being relevant mostly to Agents 
associated with the concepts of “Intelligent agents” and “Multiagent Systems” 
whereas “Econometrica”, “Ecological Modeling” and the journal “Science” 
representing the “agent-based modeling” perspective.  
 
 
Figure 6 Key Journals based on centrality 
In the following Table 2, we give details of these top journals based on centrality 
shown in the figure.  
 
Table 2 Top Journals based on Centrality 
Centrality Title Abbreviated Title 
                                                 
2 It is pertinent to note here that we faced one peculiar problem in the analysis of the retrieved ISI 
data. The Web of Science data identified a Journal named “Individual-based model”. However 
extensive searches online did not find any such journal.   
14 
0.47  Ecological Modelling ECOL MODEL 
0.29 Science SCIENCE 
0.21 Communications of the ACM COMMUN ACM 
0.32 Artificial Intelligence ARTIF INTELL and ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGE 
0.15 Econometrica ECONOMETRICA 
0.09 Journal of Theoretical Biology J THEOR BIOL 
0.08 Canadian Journal of Fisheries and 
Aquatic Sciences 
CAN J FISH AQUAT SCI 
0.08 Nature NATURE 
0.08 Annals of the New York Academy 
of Sciences 
ANN NY ACAD SCI 
The table above represents the centrality of the top ten key journals. In terms 
of centrality, the “ECOL MODEL” Journal has the highest value of centrality 
among all the journals. In addition, here we observe that “ANN NY ACAD SCI”, 
“CAN J FISH AQUAT SCI”, “NATURE” and the “ANN NY ACAD SCI” are also 
some of the top Journals of this domain in terms of Centrality.  
Next, we analyze the publications in terms of their frequencies of 
publication as given in Table 3 below. Now, interestingly, the table sorted in terms 
of article frequency, gives a slightly different set of core journals. Through 
frequency analysis of the title words of 240 journals, it can be seen that “ECOL 
MODEL” is still at the top with a frequency of 295 articles. “NATURE” and 
“SCIENCE” follow with 231 and 216 published articles respectively. “J THEO 
BIO” is next with 167 articles. Next “ECOLOGY” has published 145 articles. This 
is followed by “AM NAT”, “TRENDS ECOL EVOL”, “LECT NOTES ARTIF 
INT” and “P NATL ACAD SCI USA”. 
 
Table 3 Core Journals based on frequency 
Frequency Title Abbreviated Title 
15 
295 Ecological Modelling ECOL MODEL 
231 Nature NATURE 
216 Science SCIENCE  
167 Journal of Theoretical 
Biology 
J THEOR BIOL  
145 Ecology ECOLOGY  
123 The American Naturalist AM NAT 
121 Trends in Ecology & 
Evolution 
TRENDS ECOL EVOL 
121 Lecture Notes in Artificial 
Intelligence 
LECT NOTES ARTIF INT 
121 Proceedings of the 
National Academy of 
Sciences 
P NATL ACAD SCI USA 
Analysis of Categories 
Our next analysis was to discover the prevalence of various agent-based 
computing articles in various subject categories. This visualization is shown in 
Figure 7. The detailed analysis of the subject category based on centrality follows 
in Table 4. 
16 
 
 
Figure 7 Category data 
 
Table 4 Key categories based on Centrality 
Centrality Category 
0.44 Engineering 
0.4 Computer Science 
0.36 Mathematics3 
0.34 Ecology 
0.31 Environmental Sciences 
0.14 Biotechnology & Applied Microbiology 
0.13 Biology 
0.13 Economics 
0.12 Psychology 
 
The above table represents the centrality based ordering of the key subject 
categories. It is important to note here is that this table shows top categories from a 
total of 75 categories. Here, it can be observed that in terms of centrality, the 
                                                 
3 Shown as two categories erroneously by CiteScape 
17 
“Engineering” category leads other categories. It is however, closely followed by 
Computer Science, Mathematics, Ecology and Environmental Sciences. It appears 
however that the “Psychology” category has the lowest value of centrality among 
all other categories.  
For comparative analysis, we also analyze these categories using the 
publication frequency of articles. The results of this analysis are presented below in 
Table 5. 
Table 5 Subject Categories according to frequency 
Frequency Category 
287 Computer Science 
195 Ecology 
145 Engineering 
92 Social Sciences 
66 Biology 
57 Environmental Sciences 
57 Mathematics 
53 Environmental Studies 
52 Operations Research & Management Science 
52 Fisheries 
 
The table represents the frequency of the top ten key categories. Through 
frequency analysis of the title words of 75 categories, we interestingly come up with 
a slightly different set of results. Here, “Computer Science” with a frequency of 287 
articles leads the rest and is followed closely by Ecology and Engineering. An 
interesting observation based on the two tables is that there are certain categories 
which have relatively low frequency but are still central (in terms of having more 
citations) such as Mathematics. Amongst the top categories, we can also see 
categories with a relatively lower frequency such as 53 for “Environmental 
Sciences” and 52 for “Operations Research & Management Science” as well as 
“Fisheries”. This detailed analysis shows that prevalence of agent-based computing 
is not based on a few sporadic articles in a variety of subject categories. Instead, 
there are well-established journals and researchers with interest in and publishing a 
considerable number of papers in this domain, especially agent-based modeling and 
simulation. 
18 
Bursts in subject categories 
Next, we analyze how various subject categories have exhibited bursts. This 
is shown in the Table 6 below. Here we can see that fisheries have the largest burst 
associated with the year 1991. Next are two closely related categories “Marine and 
Freshwater Biology” and “Ecology” in the same time frame. One very interesting 
finding here is that there are a lot of bursts in non-computational categories. 
 
 
 
 
Table 6 Key bursts in subject categories 
Analysis of Author Networks 
In this section, we analyze the author co-citation networks. Figure 8 shows 
the visualization of the core authors of this domain. Here red color exhibits burst of 
articles and concentric circles identify separation of years of publications. The size 
of the circles is an indicator of the centrality of the author. Here blue is for older 
papers, green is for middle years whereas yellowish and reddish colors are for 
relatively more recent publications. Here, the descriptions are based on the color 
Burst Category Year 
13.09 Fisheries 1991 
10.3 Marine & Freshwater Biology 1991 
9.36 Ecology 1991 
5.58 Economics 1996 
4.25 Evolutionary Biology 1993 
3.76 Mathematics 1990 
3.3 Genetics & Heredity 1993 
3.2 Oceanography 1995 
19 
figures, which can be viewed in the online version of the paper, since Citespace, 
being a visualization tool, relies extensively on the use of colors to depict styles.  
 
 
Figure 8 Co-Author network visualization 
Although this visualization perhaps gives a broad picture of the various 
authors, we also present a detailed analysis of this data. This can be seen in a tabular 
form as shown below in Table 7. Here, we can observe that the top cited (most 
central) author is Don DeAngelis, a Biologist. Don is followed by another Biologist 
Michael Huston. Next is Volker Grimm, an expert in agent-based and individual-
based modeling and Kenneth A Rose, an ecologist. Next, we have Robert Axelrod, 
a Political Scientist.  Nigel Gilbert, a Sociologist and Mike Wooldridge, a Computer 
Scientist is next in the list. Finally, we have François Bousquet from the field of 
Ecological Modeling (Agriculture) and Steven F. Railsback, an Ecologist. This is 
quite an interesting result because agents and agent-based computing in general was 
supposed to be primarily from Computer Science/AI and have very specific 
meanings. However, our results show that it is actually quite prevalent and 
flourishing in an uninhibited manner in various other fields in terms of renowned 
(ISI-indexed) archival Journal articles.  
 
Table 7 Authors in terms of centrality 
Centrality Author 
0.5 DEANGELIS DL 
0.33 HUSTON M 
20 
0.16 GRIMM V 
0.08 ROSE KA 
0.08 AXELROD R 
0.07 GILBERT N 
0.07 WOOLDRIDGE M 
0.06 BOUSQUET F 
0.06 RAILSBACK SF 
 
For further comparative analysis, we plotted the top authors in terms of 
frequency of publications. This is shown in Figure 9.  
 
Figure 9 Authors in terms of frequency 
The detailed analysis of this is shown below in tabular form of Table 8 below for 
these authors and their relative frequency of publication. 
  
Table 8 Top authors based on frequency 
Frequency Author 
21 
128 GRIMM V 
118 DEANGELIS DL 
101 EPSTEIN JM 
99 WOOLDRIDGE M 
90 AXELROD R 
83 GILBERT N 
76 BOUSQUET F 
68 HUSTON M 
64 FERBER J 
59 PARKER DC 
 
It is important to note here that the results are based on a total of 387 cited authors. 
New names which appear in this table include Joshua M. Epstein, a Professor of 
Emergency Medicine. Prof. Epstein is an expert in human behavior and disease 
spread modeling. Jacques Ferber, a Computer Scientist is another new name in the 
list along with Dawn C. Parker, an agricultural Economist.  
Country-wise Distribution 
Next, we present an analysis of the spread of research in agent-based 
computing originating from different countries based on centrality. Here, in Figure 
10, we can see the visualization of various countries. Please note here that the 
concentric circles of different colors/shades here represent papers in various time 
slices (we have selected one year as one time slice). The diameter of the largest 
circle thus represents the centrality of the country. Thus the visualization identifies 
the key publications in the domain to have originated from the United States of 
America. This is followed by papers originating from countries such as England, 
China, Germany, France and Canada.  
22 
 
Figure 10 Countries with respect to centrality 
Analysis of Institutes 
In this sub-section, we present visualization for a detailed analysis of the 
role of various Institutes. We can see the temporal visualization of various institutes 
in the domain and the assortment of popular keywords associated with them on the 
right in Figure 11. 
 
Figure 11 Institutes 
Here, it can be observed that the prevalence of manuscripts originating from 
the Oak Ridge National Laboratories from the early 1990’s. Next, we see papers 
from US Fish and Wildlife services. Then, we can see papers from Kyushu 
23 
University, Japan, University of Birmingham, UK and French National Institute of 
Agricultural Research (INRA) close to 1998. From this time to 2000, a prevalent 
institute is Chinese University, Hong Kong. In around 2002, the French institute 
Centre de coopération Internationale en recherche agronomique pour le 
développement (CIRAD), an Institute of Agriculture Research for Development is 
prevalent followed closely by a sister institute, the Institut de Recherche pour le 
Développement (IRD). More recent newcomers to the field of agents include the 
MIT and the Massachusetts General Hospital, associated with the Harvard 
University.   
 In the following table, we perform an alternative analysis which is based 
instead on the frequency of articles. 
  
24 
Table 9 Core Institutes based on frequency 
Frequency Institute 
11 University of Illinois, USA 
10 INRA, France 
9 University of Michigan, USA 
9 University of Minnesota, USA 
8 University of Sheffield, UK 
8 Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 
8 Italian National Research Council (CNR), Italy 
8 Oak Ridge National Labs, USA 
7 Harvard University, USA 
7 MIT, USA 
7 University of Washington, USA 
7 University of Hong Kong, P. R. China 
7 IRD, France 
 
The Table 9 listed above represents the top institutes in terms of frequency. 
It should be noted that the frequency analysis was based on title words of a total of 
328 institutes. “University of Illinois”4 in general has a top ranking with a frequency 
of 11 articles. It is followed closely by INRA (France) with a frequency of 10 
articles. University of Michigan and University of Minnesota, both from the US 
follow next with 9 articles each.  With 8 articles each, next we have University of 
Sheffield (UK), Nanyang Technological University (Singapore), Italian National 
Research Council (CNR) and the Oak Ridge National Labs (USA). 
Summary of results 
In the current paper, we have used two different pieces of software to analyze 
various types of visualization and results emanating from the agent-based 
computing domain. In this subsection, we want to emphasize the various results that 
have been previously identified inline with the theme of agent-based computing.  
                                                 
4 ISI data extracted using CiteSpace does not differentiate further as to which exact campus of the 
University of Illinois is considered here (of the primarily three campuses i.e. UIUC, UIC, UIS.)  
25 
Firstly, we noted in the analysis using Network Workbench that the top cited 
papers of the domain contained papers from both the multiagent side of the domain 
(based in Computer Sciences) in addition to the agent-based modeling ideas (from 
Ecology/Social sciences). Next, using clustering of index terms, we observed that 
the originating ideas actually came from agent-based modeling. Whereas, we 
observed a major recent turning point with some of Grimm’s papers. However, 
another yet older turning point was Goldberg’s 1989 paper on Genetic Algorithms, 
which tied in the Ecological cluster labeled as “Cannibalism”. In addition, we see 
prevalence of the “catchment” cluster identifying the social sciences and the 
“increasing returns” cluster identifying economics. This single figure shows how 
these diverse areas are tied in together and are linked by citing documents. The 
“persistence” cluster again identifies a Computer Science “multiagent” related set 
of documents. Here, the oldest cluster is the “life history” cluster with roots in 
Biosciences. This strong intermingling of ideas has silently lead to the evolution of 
agent-based computing domain. Whereas subsequent analyses only prove the point 
that there is further diversity in each of subject categories, authors, institutions and 
countries. However, while the domain has strong footing, being able to use 
visualization has thus allowed the examination of a complex interaction of sub-
domains, which would not have been possible without the use of these tools and 
techniques. It is important for the practitioners and researchers working in the sub-
domains because firstly it clarified the reason for the confusion in the usage terms. 
Secondly, it allows researchers to identify new research fronts in parallel domains, 
which can be re-used in other domains to minimize re-inventing the wheel.   
Conclusions and Future Work 
In this paper, we have presented a detailed visual and scientometric survey 
of the entire agent-based computing domain, covering all Journal articles in 
Thomson Reuters from the era 1990-2010 for papers ranging from diverse domains 
such as agent-based modeling and simulation, agent-based software engineering, 
multi-agent systems and artificial intelligence. Our approach in this survey was 
based on actual data from the recognized Web of Science databases. This allowed 
us to cover all articles in the set of seemingly diverse domains coming under agent-
based computing. Our analysis has produced some interesting results. One such 
result is that contrary to what can expected about the evolution of the domain, with 
26 
roots in the Computer Sciences, we have discovered that the domain is also quite 
well-established and actually has a relatively higher number of cited articles in a 
number of non-computing domains. These range from the life sciences to ecological 
sciences and even the social sciences. In the future, we plan on performing a 
detailed analysis of each of these sub-domains taken individually to further 
highlight the scientometric indicators inside each of multi-agent systems, agent-
oriented software engineering and agent-based modeling. We are also currently 
working on performing visualization based analyses of somewhat lesser- related 
areas such as “Cybernetics” and even “Consumer Electronics”. 
References 
Adar, E. Guess: a language and interface for graph exploration. In, 2006 (pp. 
800): ACM 
Aoyama, H. (2010). Econophysics and companies : statistical life and death in 
complex business networks. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Axelrod, R. (1997). The complexity of cooperation: agent-based models of 
competition and colloboration. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Bankes, S. C. (2002). Agent-based modeling: A revolution? (Vol. 99, pp. 7199-
7200): National Acad Sciences. 
Barabasi, A. (2005). The origin of bursts and heavy tails in human dynamics. 
Nature, 435(7039), 207-211. 
Barabási, A., & Gelman, A. (2010). Bursts: The Hidden Pattern Behind 
Everything We Do. Physics Today, 63, 46. 
Barabási, A., Jeong, H., Néda, Z., Ravasz, E., Schubert, A., & Vicsek, T. (2002). 
Evolution of the social network of scientific collaborations. Physica A: 
Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 311(3-4), 590-614. 
Bellifemine, F., Poggi, A., & Rimassa, G. (2001). Developing multi-agent 
systems with JADE. Intelligent Agents VII Agent Theories Architectures 
and Languages, 42-47. 
Börner, K., Penumarthy, S., Meiss, M., & Ke, W. (2006). Mapping the diffusion 
of scholarly knowledge among major US research institutions. 
Scientometrics, 68(3), 415-426. 
Card, S., Mackinlay, J., & Shneiderman, B. (1999). Readings in information 
visualization: using vision to think: Morgan Kaufmann. 
Chen, C. (2006). CiteSpace II: Detecting and visualizing emerging trends and 
transient patterns in scientific literature. Journal of the American Society 
for Information Science and Technology, 57(3), 359-377. 
Chen, C., Panjwani, G., Proctor, J., Allendoerfer, K., Aluker, S., Sturtz, D., et al. 
(2006). Visualizing the Evolution of HCI. People and Computers XIX—
The Bigger Picture, 233-250. 
Chen, C., Paul, R., & O'Keefe, B. (2001). Fitting the jigsaw of citation: 
Information visualization in domain analysis. Journal of the American 
Society for Information Science and Technology, 52(4), 315-330. 
27 
Chun-juan, L., Yue, C., & Hai-yan, H. (2010). Scientometric & Visualization 
Analysis of Innovation Studies International. Technology and Innovation 
Management, 1. 
Dydenko, I., Durning, B., Jamal, F., Cachard, C., & Friboulet, D. (2005). An 
autoregressive model-based method for contrast agent detection in 
ultrasound radiofrequency images. Ultrason Imaging, 27(1), 37-53. 
Epstein, J., & Axtell, R. (1996). Growing artificial societies: MIT press 
Cambridge, MA. 
Etzkowitz, H., & Leydesdorff, L. (2000). The dynamics of innovation: from 
National Systems and. Research policy, 29(2), 109-123. 
Gilbert, N., & Troitzsch, K. G. (2005). Simulation for the social Scientist (Second 
ed.): McGraw Hill Education. 
Gonzalez, P. P., Cardenas, M., Camacho, D., Franyuti, A., Rosas, O., & Lagunez-
Otero, J. (2003). Cellulat: an agent-based intracellular signalling model. 
Biosystems, 68(2-3), 171-185, doi:S0303264702000941 [pii]. 
Griffith, B., Small, H., Stonehill, J., & Dey, S. (1974). The structure of scientific 
literatures II: Toward a macro-and microstructure for science. Science 
studies, 4(4), 339-365. 
Hou, H., Kretschmer, H., & Liu, Z. (2008). The structure of scientific 
collaboration networks in Scientometrics. Scientometrics, 75(2), 189-202, 
doi:10.1007/s11192-007-1771-3. 
Jennings, N. (1999a). Agent-based computing: Promise and perils. Paper 
presented at the 16th Int. Joint Conf. on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-99), 
Stockholm, Sweden,  
Jennings, N. Agent-based computing: Promise and perils. In, 1999b (Vol. 16, pp. 
1429-1436): Citeseer 
LaRowe, G., Ambre, S., Burgoon, J., Ke, W., & Börner, K. (2009). The Scholarly 
Database and its utility for scientometrics research. Scientometrics, 79(2), 
219-234. 
Lesser, S. A. a. V. Multiagent Reinforcement Learning and Self-Organization in a 
Network of Agents. In  AAMAS 07, Honolulu, Hawaii, 2007: ACM 
Leydesdorff, L. (2001). The challenge of scientometrics: The development, 
measurement, and self-organization of scientific communications: 
Universal-Publishers. 
Macal, C. M., & North, M. J. (2007). Agent-based modeling and simulation: 
desktop ABMS. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 39th conference 
on Winter simulation: 40 years! The best is yet to come, Washington D.C.,  
Mukhopadhyay, R., Costes, S. V., Bazarov, A. V., Hines, W. C., Barcellos-Hoff, 
M. H., & Yaswen, P. (2010). Promotion of variant human mammary 
epithelial cell outgrowth by ionizing radiation: an agent-based model 
supported by in vitro studies. Breast Cancer Res, 12(1), R11, doi:bcr2477 
[pii] 10.1186/bcr2477. 
Niazi, M., & Hussain, A. (2009). Agent based Tools for Modeling and Simulation 
of Self-Organization in Peer-to-Peer, Ad-Hoc and other Complex 
Networks. IEEE Communications Magazine, 47(3), 163 - 173. 
Niazi, M., & Hussain, A. (2010). A Novel Agent-Based Simulation Framework 
for Sensing in Complex Adaptive Environments (In-Press). IEEE Sensors 
Journal, 11(0), doi:10.1109/JSEN.2010.2068044. 
Niazi, M., & Hussain, A. (2011). Social Network Analysis Of Trends In The 
Consumer Electronics Domain. Paper presented at the International 
28 
Conference on Consumer Electronics, Las Vegas, USA, 9-12 January, 
2011 
Niazi, M., Siddique, Q., Hussain, A., & Kolberg, M. (2010). Verification and 
Validation of an Agent-Based Forest Fire Simulation Model. Paper 
presented at the SCS Spring Simulation Conference, Orlando, FL, USA, 
April 2010 
Niazi, M. A., & Hussain, A. (2011). A Novel Agent-Based Simulation Framework 
for Sensing in Complex Adaptive Environments. Sensors Journal, IEEE, 
11(2), 404-412. 
Niazi, M. A., & Hussain, A. (2011). Sensing Emergence in Complex Systems. 
IEEE Sensors Journal, doi:10.1109/JSEN.2011.2142303. 
Park, H., Hong, H., & Leydesdorff, L. (2005). A comparison of the knowledge-
based innovation systems in the economies of South Korea and the 
Netherlands using Triple Helix indicators. Scientometrics, 65(1), 3-27. 
Park, H., & Leydesdorff, L. (2008). Korean journals in the Science Citation Index: 
What do they reveal about the intellectual structure of S&T in Korea? 
Scientometrics, 75(3), 439-462. 
Pouris, A., & Pouris, A. (2010). Scientometrics of a pandemic: HIV/AIDS 
research in South Africa and the World. Scientometrics, 1-12, 
doi:10.1007/s11192-010-0277-6. 
Pullen, M. (2000). The Network Workbench: network simulation software for 
academic investigation of Internet concepts. Computer Networks, 32(3), 
365-378. 
Reuters, T. (2008). Web of science. Online factsheet Thomson Reuters, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania (Available from: 
www.thomsonreuters.com/content/PDF/scientific/Web_of_Science_factshe
et.pdf ). 
Sandström, E., & Sandström, U. CiteSpace Visualization of Proximity Clusters in 
Dentistry Research. In, 2007 (pp. 25–28) 
Sedgewick, R., & Schidlowsky, M. (2003). Algorithms in Java, Part 5: Graph 
Algorithms: Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc. Boston, MA, 
USA. 
Siddiqa, A., Niazi, M. A., Mustafa, F., Bokhari, H., Hussain, A., Akram, N., et al. 
A new hybrid agent-based modeling & simulation decision support system 
for breast cancer data analysis. In  Information and Communication 
Technologies, 2009. ICICT '09. International Conference on, 15-16 Aug. 
2009 2009 (pp. 134-139) 
Sierra-Flores, M., Guzmán, M., Raga, A., & Pérez, I. (2009). The productivity of 
Mexican astronomers in the field of outflows from young stars. 
Scientometrics, 81(3), 765-777. 
Small, H. (1973). Co citation in the scientific literature: A new measure of the 
relationship between two documents. Journal of the American Society for 
Information Science, 24(4), 265-269. 
Small, H. (1993). Macro-level changes in the structure of co-citation clusters: 
1983–1989. Scientometrics, 26(1), 5-20. 
Small, H., & Griffith, B. (1974). The structure of scientific literatures I: 
Identifying and graphing specialties. Science studies, 17-40. 
Snead, D., Barre, P., Bajpai, P. K., Taylor, A., Reynolds, D., Mehling, B., et al. 
(1995). The use of a zinc based bioceramic as an osteoconductive agent in 
the rat model. Biomed Sci Instrum, 31, 141-146. 
29 
Sooryamoorthy, R. (2010). Scientific publications of engineers in South Africa, 
1975–2005. Scientometrics, 1-16, doi:10.1007/s11192-010-0288-3. 
Team, N. (2006). Network Workbench Tool. Indiana University, Northeastern 
University, and University of Michigan. 
Weiss, G. (Ed.). (1998). Multiagent Systems, A Modern Approach to Distributed 
Artificial Intelligence. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press. 
White, H., & Griffith, B. (1981). Author cocitation: A literature measure of 
intellectual structure. Journal of the American Society for Information 
Science, 32(3), 163-171. 
White, H., & McCain, K. (1998). Visualizing a discipline: An author co-citation 
analysis of information science, 1972-1995. Journal of the American 
Society for Information Science, 49(4), 327-355. 
White, H. D., & McCain, K. W. (1998). Visualizing a discipline: An author co-
citation analysis of information science, 1972–1995. Journal of the 
American Society for Information Science, 49(4), 327-355, 
doi:10.1002/(sici)1097-4571(19980401)49:4<327::aid-asi4>3.0.co;2-4. 
Wooldridge, M. (1998). Agent-based computing. Interoperable Communication 
Networks, 1, 71-98. 
Wooldridge, M. (2009). An introduction to multiagent systems: Wiley. 
Xiaofei, D. (2010). A Study on Simulation of Forest Fire Spread Based on a 
Multi-Agent Model. Anhui Agricultural Science Bulletin. 
Zhao, R., & Wang, J. (2010). Visualizing the research on pervasive and 
ubiquitous computing. Scientometrics, 1-20. 
 
 
30 
Appendix A: Details of Search Keywords 
Here we would like to mention the keywords used for searching the ISI web of knowledge in addition 
to the reasoning behind the selection. Arguably there are numerous ways to classify as sub-domain 
based on keywords. In this particular case, some of the keywords were even  shared with Chemical 
and Biological Journals (e.g. using the word agent for e.g. Biological agent or Chemical agent even). 
As such, we had to limit the search to papers with a focus on either agent-based modeling specifically 
or else in the domain of multiagent systems.   
The search was thus performed on titles and the exact search from the ISI web of knowledge was as 
following: 
Title=(agent-based OR individual-based OR multi-agent OR multiagent OR ABM*) AND 
Title=(model* OR simulat*) 
Timespan=All Years. Databases=SCI-EXPANDED, SSCI, A&HCI, CPCI-S. 
Date retrieved: 8th September 2010 (1064 records) 
