ar
X
iv
:1
70
8.
05
93
0v
1 
 [
cs
.A
I]
  2
0 
A
ug
 2
01
7
Solving a New 3D Bin Packing Problem with Deep Reinforcement Learning
Method
Haoyuan Hu, Xiaodong Zhang, Xiaowei Yan, Longfei Wang, Yinghui Xu
Artificial Intelligence Department, Zhejiang Cainiao Supply Chain Management Co., Ltd., Hangzhou, China
haoyuan.huhy@cainiao.com, yuhui.zxd@cainiao.com, xiaowei.yanxw@cainiao.com,
shouchu.wlf@cainiao.com, renji.xyh@taobao.com
Abstract
In this paper, a new type of 3D bin packing problem
(BPP) is proposed, in which a number of cuboid-
shaped items must be put into a bin one by one or-
thogonally. The objective is to find a way to place
these items that can minimize the surface area of
the bin. This problem is based on the fact that there
is no fixed-sized bin in many real business scenar-
ios and the cost of a bin is proportional to its sur-
face area. Our research shows that this problem is
NP-hard. Based on previous research on 3D BPP,
the surface area is determined by the sequence, spa-
tial locations and orientations of items. Among
these factors, the sequence of items plays a key
role in minimizing the surface area. Inspired by re-
cent achievements of deep reinforcement learning
(DRL) techniques, especially Pointer Network, on
combinatorial optimization problems such as TSP,
a DRL-based method is applied to optimize the se-
quence of items to be packed into the bin. Numer-
ical results show that the method proposed in this
paper achieve about 5% improvement than heuris-
tic method.
1 Introduction
Bin packing problem (BPP) is a classical and important op-
timization problem in logistic system and production sys-
tem. There are many variants of BPP, but the most mean-
ingful and challenging one is 3D BPP, in which a number
of cuboid-shaped items with different sizes should be packed
into bins orthogonally. The size and cost of bins are fixed and
known and the objective is to minimize the number of bins
used, i.e., minimize the total cost. BPP is a typical and in-
teresting combinatorial optimization problem and is NP-hard
( [Coffman et al., 1980]), so it is a very popular research di-
rection in optimization area. In addition, BPPs have many
applications in practice. An effective bin packing algorithm
means the reduction of computation time, total packing cost
and increase in utilization of resources.
Because the cost of packing materials, which is mainly de-
termined by their surface area, occupies the most part of pack-
ing cost, and we have found that in many real business sce-
narios there is no bin with fixed size (e.g., flexible and soft
packing materials, not cartons or other bins, are used to pack
items in cross-border e-commerce), so a new type of 3D BPP
is proposed in our research. The objective of this new type of
3D BPP is to pack all items into a bin with minimized surface
area.
Due to the difficulty of obtaining optimal solutions of
BPPs, many researchers have proposed various approxima-
tion or heuristic algorithms. To achieve good results, heuris-
tic algorithms have to be designed specifically for different
type of problems or situations, so heuristic algorithms have
limitation in generality. In recent years, artificial intelligence,
especially deep reinforcement learning, has received intense
research and achieved amazing results in many fields. In
addition, DRL method has shown huge potential to solve
combinatorial optimization problems ( [Vinyals et al., 2015],
[Bello et al., 2016]). In this paper, a DRL-based method is
applied to solve this new type of 3D BPP and numerical ex-
periments based on real data are designed and conducted to
demonstrate effectiveness of this method.
2 Related Work
2.1 3D bin packing problem
Bin packing problem is a classical and popular optimiza-
tion problem. Since 1970s, it has attracted great in-
terest of many researchers and some valuable achieve-
ments have been obtained. The two-dimensional BPP
is NP-hard ( [Coffman et al., 1980]), so as a generaliza-
tion of 2D BPP, 3D BPP is strongly NP-hard. For this
reason, a lot of research focuses on approximation al-
gorithms and heuristic algorithms. [Scheithauer, 1991]
proposed the first approximation algorithm for 3D BPP
and investigated the performance bound of the algorithm.
And many effective heuristic algorithms, such as Tabu
Search ( [Lodi et al., 2002], [Crainic et al., 2009]), guided
local search ( [Faroe et al., 2003]), extreme point-based
heuristics ( [Crainic et al., 2008]), hybrid genetic algorithm
( [Kang et al., 2012]), have been proposed. There are also
some research about exact solution method for 3D BPP.
[Chen et al., 1995] considered a problem of loading contain-
ers with cartons of non-uniform size, which is a generaliza-
tion of 3D BPP where bins may have different sizes, and
a mixed integer programming model was developed to ob-
tain optimal solutions. An exact branch-and-bound algo-
rithm for 3D BPP was proposed in [Martello et al., 2000]
and many instances with up to 90 items can be solved
to optimality within a reasonable time limit. Some vari-
ants of BPP from real world are also studied, such as vari-
able size bin packing problem ( [Kang and Park, 2003]),
bin packing problem with conflicts ( [Khanafer et al., 2010],
[Gendreau et al., 2004]) and bin packing problem with frag-
ile objects ( [Clautiaux et al., 2014]).
Another class of packing problem, named strip packing
problem, is also worth mentioning here, because it is very
similar to our proposed problem. In the strip packing prob-
lem, a given set of cubiod-shaped items should be packed into
a given strip orthogonally by minimizing the height of pack-
ing. The length and width of the strip is fixed and limited, and
the height is infinite (for two dimensional strip packing prob-
lem, the width of strip is fixed and the length is infinite). This
type of problem has many applications in steel industry and
textile industry, and different types of algorithms have been
proposed to solve the problem, such as exact algorithms in
[Martello et al., 2003] and [Kenmochi et al., 2009], approxi-
mation algorithm in [Steinberg, 1997], heuristic algorithm in
[Bortfeldt and Mack, 2007] and meta-heuristic algorithms in
[Bortfeldt, 2006] and [Hopper and Turton, 2001].
2.2 DRL in combinatorial optimization
Even though machine learning and combinatorial optimiza-
tion have been studied for decades respectively, there are
few investigations about application of machine learning
method in combinatorial optimization problems. One re-
search direction is designing hyper-heuristics based on re-
inforcement learning (RL) ideas. An overview of hyper-
heuristics is presented in [Burke et al., 2013], in which some
hyper-heuristics based on learning mechanism are discussed.
In [Nareyek, 2003], the heuristics selection probability
is updated based on non-stationary RL. In addition, var-
ious score updating methods have been proposed in the
area of hyper-heuristics, such as binary exponential backoff
([Remde et al., 2009]), tabu search ([Burke et al., 2003]) and
choice function ([Cowling et al., 2000]).
Recent advances in sequence-to-sequence model
([Sutskever et al., 2014]) have motivated the research
about neural combinatorial optimization. Attention
mechanism, which is used to augment neural networks,
contributes a lot in areas such as machine transla-
tion ([Bahdanau et al., 2014]) and algorithm-learning
([Graves et al., 2014]). In [Vinyals et al., 2015], a neu-
ral network with a specific attention mechanism named
Pointer Net was proposed and a supervised learning
method is applied to solve the Traveling Salesman Prob-
lem. [Bello et al., 2016] developed a neural combinatorial
optimization framework with RL, and some classical prob-
lems, such as Traveling Salesman Problem and Knapsack
Problem are solved in this framework. Because of the
effectiveness and generality of the methodology proposed
in [Bello et al., 2016], our research is mainly based on their
framework and methods.
3 Deep Reinforcement Learning Method for
3D Bin Packing Problem
3.1 Definition of the problem
In a typical 3D BPP, a set of items must be packed into fixed-
sized bins in the way that minimizes the number of bins used.
Unlike typical BPP with fixed-sized bins, we focus on the
problem of designing the bin with least surface area that could
pack all the items. In real business scenarios, such as cross-
board e-commerce, no fixed-sized bin is available and flexible
and soft materials are used to pack all the items. At the same
time, the cost of a bin is directly proportional to its surface
area. In this case, minimizing the surface area for the bin
would bring great economic benefits.
The exact formulation of our problem is given below.
Given a set of cuboid-shaped items and each item i is char-
acterized by length(li), width(wi) and height(hi). Our target
is to find out the least surface area bin that could pack all
items. We define (xi, yi, zi) as the left-bottom-back (LBB)
coordinate of item i and define (0, 0, 0) as the left-bottom-
back coordinate of the bin. The details of decision variables
are shown in Table 1. Based on the descriptions of problem
and notations, the mathematical formulation for the new type
of 3D BPP is presented as follows:
min L ·W + L ·H +W ·H
s.t.
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
sij + uij + bij = 1 (1)
?i1 + ?i2 + ?i3 + ?i4 + ?i5 + ?i6 = 1 (2)
xi ? xj + L · sij ? L? l?i (3)
yi ? yj +W · uij ?W ? w?i (4)
zi ? zj +H · bij ? H ? h?i (5)
0 ? xi ? L? l?i (6)
0 ? yi ?W ? w?i (7)
0 ? zi ? H ? h?i (8)
l?i = ?i1li + ?i2li + ?i3wi + ?i4wi + ?i5hi + ?i6hi (9)
w?i = ?i1wi + ?i2hi + ?i3li + ?i4hi + ?i5li + ?i6wi (10)
h?i = ?i1hi + ?i2wi + ?i3hi + ?i4li + ?i5wi + ?i6li (11)
sij , uij , bij ? {0, 1} (12)
?i1, ?i2, ?i3, ?i4, ?i5, ?i6 ? {0, 1} (13)
where sij = 1 if item i is in the left side of item j, uij = 1
if item i is under item j, bij = 1 if item i is in the back of item
j, ?i1 = 1 if the orientation of item i is front-up, ?i2 = 1 if the
orientation of item i is front-down, ?i3 = 1 if the orientation
of item i is side-up, ?i4 = 1 if the orientation of item i is side-
down, ?i5 = 1 if orientation of item i is buttom-up, ?i6 = 1 if
orientation of item i is buttom-down.
Constraints (9), (10), (11) denote the length, width, height
of item i after orientating it. Constraints (1), (3), (4), (5) are
used to guarantee there is no overlap between two packed
items while constraints (6), (7), (8) are used to guarantee the
item will not be put outside the bin.
We have tried to solve the problem by optimization solvers,
such as IBM Cplex Optimizer, but it is very difficult to solve
in reasonable time limit and we will prove this problem is
NP-hard in the appendix.
Table 1: Decision Variables
Variable Type Meaning
L Continuous the length of the bin
W Continuous the width of the bin
H Continuous the height of the bin
xi Continuous LBB coordinate of item i in x axis
yi Continuous LBB coordinate of item i in y axis
zi Continuous LBB coordinate of item i in z axis
sij Binary item i is in the left side of item j or not
uij Binary item i is under item j or not
bij Binary item i is in the back of item j or not
?i1 Binary orientation of item i is front-up or not
?i2 Binary orientation of item i is front-down or not
?i3 Binary orientation of item i is side-up or not
?i4 Binary orientation of item i is side-down or not
?i5 Binary orientation of item i is buttom-up or not
?i6 Binary orientation of item i is buttom-down or not
3.2 A DRL-based method
In this section, we will describe the DRL-based method to
solve this new type of 3D BPP. Since solving it exactly is in-
tractable, we use a constructive approach, i.e., packing items
one by one in sequence. There are three class of decisions to
make:
1. the sequence in which the items are packed into the bins.
2. item orientation to be put into the bin.
3. the strategy that selects an empty maximal space to put
the item.
We design a heuristic algorithm to choose the sequence,
orientation and empty maximal space. When putting an item,
the algorithm will go over all empty maximal spaces and
6 orientations for this item and choose the empty maximal
space and orientation that yields least surface area. After that,
we will go over all the remaining items and identify one that
will yield least waste space. The detailed algorithm is de-
scribed in the appendix. In this paper, DRL is used to find
better sequence to pack the items, other strategies for choos-
ing item orientation and empty maximal space are the same
as the heuristic mentioned above. In doing so, we are only
demonstrating that DRL can be powerful in finding a better
solution than well-designed heuristic. In our future work, we
will investigate how to incorporate all of item sequence, ori-
entation and empty maximal space choice into DRL frame-
work.
Architecture of the network
In our research, the design of network architecture is inspired
by the work of [Vinyals et al., 2015] and [Bello et al., 2016].
In their studies, a neural network architecture named Pointer
Net (Ptr-Net) is proposed and used to solve some classi-
cal combinatorial optimization problems, such as Traveling
Salesman Problem (TSP) and Knapsack Problem. For ex-
ample, when solving TSP, the coordinates of points on two-
dimensional plane are used as input to the model step by step,
and the sequence in which points are visited is the predicted
results. This architecture is similar to sequence-to-sequence
model, which is proposed in [Sutskever et al., 2014] and is
a powerful method in machine translation. There are two
main differences between Ptr-Net and sequence-to-sequence
model: first, the number of target classes in each step of the
output in sequence-to-sequence model is fixed, but in Ptr-Net,
the output dictionaries size is variable; second, the attention
mechanism is used to blend hidden units of the encoder to
a context vector in sequence-to-sequence model, but Ptr-Net
use attention as a pointer to select a member of the input se-
quence as the output.
The neural network architecture in our research is shown
in Figure 1. The input to this network is a sequence of size
data (length, width and height) of items to be packed, and
the output of this network is another sequence which repre-
sents the order we pack those items. The network consists
two RNNs: an encoder network and a decoder network. At
each step of encoder network, the size data (length, width
and height) of one item are embedded and given as input to
the LSTM cell and the cell output is collected. After the fi-
nal step of the encoder network, the cell state and outputs are
given to the decoder network. At each step of decoder net-
work, one of the outputs of encoder network is selected as the
input of the next step. For example, as show in Figure 1, the
output of the 3rd step of decoder network is 4, so the output
of the 4th step of encoder network is selected (pointed) and
given as the input to the 4th step of the decoder network. And
the attention mechanism and glimpse mechanism proposed
in [Bello et al., 2016] is also used to integrate the informa-
tion of output of decoder cell and outputs of encoder network
to predict which item will be selected in each step.
Figure 1: Architecture of the neural network
Policy-based reinforcement learning method
In this paper, reinforcement learning methodology is used to
train the neural network. The input of network can be de-
noted as s = {(li, wi, hi)}ni=1, where li, wi, hi represents the
length, width and height of the ith item respectively. The out-
put of network is the sequence in which the items are packed
into the bin, which can be denoted as o. And if the items are
packed in this sequence, there will be a smallest bin that can
pack all the items. We use the surface area (SA) of the bin to
evaluate the sequence, and we use SA(o|s) to denote the sur-
face area. The stochastic policy of the neural network can be
defined as p(o|s), i.e., the probability of choosing sequence
o in which items are packed given a number of items s. And
the goal of training is to give high probabilities to sequences
that correspond to small surface areas. To be more specific,
we use ? to denote the parameters of the neural network, and
the training objective is the expected surface area, which is
defined as:
J(? |s) = Eo?p?(·|s)SA(o|s)
In [Williams, 1992], a general class of associative re-
inforcement learning algorithms, called REINFORCE algo-
rithms are proposed. These algorithms can make weight adu-
justments in a direction that lies along the gradient of ex-
pected reinforcement. Based on the ideas of these algorithms,
in each step of training, if the reward, baseline value and prob-
ability distribution of prediction are obtained, then the param-
eters of the neural network, ?, is incremented by an amount
??J(? |s) = Eo?p?(·|s) [(SA(o|s)? b(s))??logp?(o|s)]
where b(s) denotes the baseline value of surface area and
is used to reduce the variance of the gradients. And if we
randomly getM i.i.d. samples s1, s2, . . . , sM , then the above
gradients can be approximated by:
??J(?|s) ?
1
M
M
?
i=1
[(SA(oi|si)? b(si))??logp?(oi|si)]
Baseline iteration: memory replay
For a sample si, the baseline value b(si) is initialized by cal-
culating the surface area of a packing plan which is generated
by a heuristic algorithm. And in each step, the baseline value
is updated as:
b?(si) = b(si) + ?(SA(oi|si)? b(si))
where SA(oi|si) is the surface area calculated at each step.
Random sampling and beam search
For each sample, the output of neural network is randomly
sampled based on the probability distribution given by the
policy network during training stage. While in testing stage,
the greedy strategy is applied, i.e., in each step, the prediction
with maximal probability is selected as output. In addition, a
beam search method is used in the testing procedure to en-
hance the performance of neural network, i.e., the predictions
with top-k highest probability are selected and maintained in
each step.
As a conclusion of the discussion above, the training pro-
cedure of the neural network can be shown in Algorithm 1.
4 Experiments
To test the performance of the model, a series of experiments
on real data are conducted. The experiments can be classi-
fied into three categories based on the number of items in
one customer order, i.e., 8, 10 and 12. In all of the experi-
ments, we use 150,000 train samples and 150,000 test sam-
ples. Despite the difference in item number, we use the same
hyper-parameters to train the model. We use mini-batch of
size 128 and LSTM cell with 128 hidden units. We train the
model with Adam optimizer with initial learning rate of 10?3
and decay every 5000 steps by a factor of 0.96. All the pa-
rameters are initialized randomly in [?0.08, 0.08] and clip L2
Algorithm 1 Training Procedure
1: Training set S, number of training steps T , batch size B.
2: Initialize Pointer Net params ?.
3: Initialize baseline value according to heuristic algorithm.
4: for t = 1 to T do
5: Select a batch of sample si for i ? {1, · · · , B}.
6: Sample solution oi based on p?(·|si) for i ?
{1, · · · , B}.
7: Let g?=
1
B
?B
i=1[(SA(oi|si)? b(si))??logp?(oi|si)].
8: Update ? = ADAM(?, g?).
9: Update baseline b(si) = b(si)+?(SA(oi|si)? b(si))
for i ? {1, · · · , B}.
10: end for
11: return pointer net parameters ?.
Table 2: Average surface area
No. of bins Random Heuristic RL Sampling RL BS
8 44.70 43.97 41.82 41.82
10 48.38 47.33 45.03 45.02
12 50.78 49.34 46.71 46.71
norm of our gradients to 1.0. We use the surface area calcu-
lated by heuristic algorithm as initial baseline input and apply
? = 0.7 during the baseline iteration. We use 1000,000 steps
to train the model and it will take about 12 hours for Tesla
M40 GPU machine. When testing, we use beam search (BS)
of size 3. Model implementation with TensorFlow will be
available soon. The performance indicator is average surface
area (ASA).
The results of testing are shown in Table 2. Using beam
search (BS), the proposed method achieves 4.89%, 4.88%,
5.33% improvement than heuristic algorithm for Bin8, Bin10
and Bin12. Optimal sequences for 5000 samples of Bin8 are
obtained by exhaustive method, and the gap between results
of heuristic algorithm and optimal solutions is about 10%,
which means that RL BS results are very close to optimal
sequences.
5 Conclusion
In this paper, a new type of 3D bin packing problem is pro-
posed. Different from the classical 3D BPP, the objective
of the new problem is to minimize the surface area of the
smallest bin that can pack all items. Due to the complexity
of the problem, it is very difficult to obtain optimal solution
and heuristic algorithm may have the problem of lack of gen-
erality. Therefore, we apply the Pointer Net framework and
and a DRL-based method to optimize the sequence of items
to be packed. The model is trained and tested with a large
number of real data. Numerical experiment results show that
the DRL-based method outperforms a well-designed, effec-
tive heuristic algorithm significantly. Our main contributions
include: firstly, a new type of 3D BPP is proposed; secondly,
the DRL technique is firstly applied in solving bin packing
problem. In the future research, we will focus on investiga-
tion of more effective network architecture and training algo-
rithm. In addition, integrating the selection of orientation and
empty maximal space into the architecture of neural network
is also worthy of study.
Acknowledgements
We are extremely grateful to our colleagues, including Rong
Jin, Shenghuo Zhu and Sen Yang from iDST of Alibaba, Qing
Da, Shichen Liu, Yujing Hu from Search Business Unit of
Alibaba, Lijun Zhu, Ying Zhang and Yujie Chen from AI
Department of Cainiao, for their insight and expertise that
greatly assisted the research and the presentation of the pa-
per. We would also like to show our sincere appreciation to
the support of Jun Yang and Siyu Wang from Alibaba Cloud
in the implementation of DRL network in TensorFlow.
References
[Bahdanau et al., 2014] Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun
Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Neural machine translation
by jointly learning to align and translate. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1409.0473, 2014.
[Bello et al., 2016] Irwan Bello, Hieu Pham, Quoc V Le,
Mohammad Norouzi, and Samy Bengio. Neural combi-
natorial optimization with reinforcement learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1611.09940, 2016.
[Bortfeldt and Mack, 2007] Andreas Bortfeldt and Daniel
Mack. A heuristic for the three-dimensional strip pack-
ing problem. European Journal of Operational Research,
183(3):1267–1279, 2007.
[Bortfeldt, 2006] Andreas Bortfeldt. A genetic algorithm for
the two-dimensional strip packing problem with rectangu-
lar pieces. European Journal of Operational Research,
172(3):814–837, 2006.
[Burke et al., 2003] Edmund K Burke, Graham Kendall,
and Eric Soubeiga. A tabu-search hyperheuristic for
timetabling and rostering. Journal of heuristics, 9(6):451–
470, 2003.
[Burke et al., 2013] Edmund K Burke, Michel Gendreau,
Matthew Hyde, Graham Kendall, Gabriela Ochoa, Ender
O?zcan, and Rong Qu. Hyper-heuristics: A survey of the
state of the art. Journal of the Operational Research Soci-
ety, 64(12):1695–1724, 2013.
[Chen et al., 1995] CS Chen, Shen-Ming Lee, and QS Shen.
An analytical model for the container loading problem.
European Journal of Operational Research, 80(1):68–76,
1995.
[Clautiaux et al., 2014] Franc?ois Clautiaux, Mauro DellAm-
ico, Manuel Iori, and Ali Khanafer. Lower and upper
bounds for the bin packing problem with fragile objects.
Discrete Applied Mathematics, 163:73–86, 2014.
[Coffman et al., 1980] Edward G Coffman, Jr, Michael R
Garey, David S Johnson, and Robert Endre Tarjan. Perfor-
mance bounds for level-oriented two-dimensional packing
algorithms. SIAM Journal on Computing, 9(4):808–826,
1980.
[Cowling et al., 2000] Peter Cowling, Graham Kendall, and
Eric Soubeiga. A hyperheuristic approach to scheduling a
sales summit. In International Conference on the Prac-
tice and Theory of Automated Timetabling, pages 176–
190. Springer, 2000.
[Crainic et al., 2008] Teodor Gabriel Crainic, Guido Perboli,
and Roberto Tadei. Extreme point-based heuristics for
three-dimensional bin packing. Informs Journal on com-
puting, 20(3):368–384, 2008.
[Crainic et al., 2009] Teodor Gabriel Crainic, Guido Perboli,
and Roberto Tadei. Ts 2 pack: A two-level tabu search
for the three-dimensional bin packing problem. European
Journal of Operational Research, 195(3):744–760, 2009.
[Faroe et al., 2003] Oluf Faroe, David Pisinger, and Mar-
tin Zachariasen. Guided local search for the three-
dimensional bin-packing problem. Informs journal on
computing, 15(3):267–283, 2003.
[Gendreau et al., 2004] Michel Gendreau, Gilbert Laporte,
and Fre?de?ric Semet. Heuristics and lower bounds for the
bin packing problem with conflicts. Computers & Opera-
tions Research, 31(3):347–358, 2004.
[Graves et al., 2014] Alex Graves, Greg Wayne, and Ivo
Danihelka. Neural turing machines. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1410.5401, 2014.
[Hopper and Turton, 2001] Eva Hopper and Brian CH Tur-
ton. A review of the application of meta-heuristic algo-
rithms to 2d strip packing problems. Artificial Intelligence
Review, 16(4):257–300, 2001.
[Kang and Park, 2003] Jangha Kang and Sungsoo Park. Al-
gorithms for the variable sized bin packing problem. Eu-
ropean Journal of Operational Research, 147(2):365–372,
2003.
[Kang et al., 2012] Kyungdaw Kang, Ilkyeong Moon, and
Hongfeng Wang. A hybrid genetic algorithm with a
new packing strategy for the three-dimensional bin pack-
ing problem. Applied Mathematics and Computation,
219(3):1287–1299, 2012.
[Kenmochi et al., 2009] Mitsutoshi Kenmochi, Takashi
Imamichi, Koji Nonobe, Mutsunori Yagiura, and Hiroshi
Nagamochi. Exact algorithms for the two-dimensional
strip packing problem with and without rotations. Eu-
ropean Journal of Operational Research, 198(1):73–83,
2009.
[Khanafer et al., 2010] Ali Khanafer, Franc?ois Clautiaux,
and El-Ghazali Talbi. New lower bounds for bin packing
problems with conflicts. European journal of operational
research, 206(2):281–288, 2010.
[Lodi et al., 2002] Andrea Lodi, Silvano Martello, and
Daniele Vigo. Heuristic algorithms for the three-
dimensional bin packing problem. European Journal of
Operational Research, 141(2):410–420, 2002.
[Martello et al., 2000] Silvano Martello, David Pisinger, and
Daniele Vigo. The three-dimensional bin packing prob-
lem. Operations Research, 48(2):256–267, 2000.
[Martello et al., 2003] Silvano Martello, Michele Monaci,
and Daniele Vigo. An exact approach to the strip-packing
problem. INFORMS Journal on Computing, 15(3):310–
319, 2003.
[Nareyek, 2003] Alexander Nareyek. Choosing search
heuristics by non-stationary reinforcement learning. In
Metaheuristics: Computer decision-making, pages 523–
544. Springer, 2003.
[Remde et al., 2009] Stephen Remde, Keshav Dahal, Peter
Cowling, and Nic Colledge. Binary exponential back off
for tabu tenure in hyperheuristics. In European Conference
on Evolutionary Computation in Combinatorial Optimiza-
tion, pages 109–120. Springer, 2009.
[Scheithauer, 1991] Guntram Scheithauer. A three-
dimensional bin packing algorithm. Elektronische
Informationsverarbeitung und Kybernetik, 27(5/6):263–
271, 1991.
[Steinberg, 1997] A Steinberg. A strip-packing algorithm
with absolute performance bound 2. SIAM Journal on
Computing, 26(2):401–409, 1997.
[Sutskever et al., 2014] Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and
Quoc V Le. Sequence to sequence learning with neural
networks. In Advances in neural information processing
systems, pages 3104–3112, 2014.
[Vinyals et al., 2015] Oriol Vinyals, Meire Fortunato, and
Navdeep Jaitly. Pointer networks. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, pages 2692–2700, 2015.
[Williams, 1992] Ronald J Williams. Simple statistical
gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforce-
ment learning. Machine learning, 8(3-4):229–256, 1992.
A 3D Bin Packing Heuristic Algorithm
The detailed 3D bin packing heuristic algorithm is:
The heuristic algorithm uses both least surface area heuris-
tic and least waste space heuristic while our DRL method
only uses least surface area heuristic.
B NP-hardness of New Type of 3D BPP
Lemma B.1 The new type of 3D BPP proposed in this paper
is NP-hard.
Proof: First of all, we will prove the new type of 2D BPP
is NP-hard. To show it is NP-hard, we will give a reduction
of 1D Bin Packing Problem.
Given a one-dimensional bin packing problem, it consists
of n items with integer size w1, · · · , wn and bins with integer
capacity W . The objective is to minimize the number of bins
used to pack all items.
To convert it into new type of 2D BPP, we assume that
there are n items with width wi and height 1/(n ·max(wi)).
And there is also a item with width W and height W · n ·
max(wi), which is called as Base Item. The new type of 2D
BPP problem is to find the bin with least surface area to pack
the generated n+ 1 items.
Without loss of generality, we assume the Base Item is on
the left-buttom of the bin. Adding one item on the right side
Algorithm 2 3D Bin Packing Heuristic Algorithm
1: Denote the set of n items as I. Each item is of length li,
height hi and width wi.
2: Initialize a sufficiently large bin(B) with length L, width
W , height H (We could set L = W = H =
?n
i=1 max(li, hi, wi)).
3: Initilize the set of remaining items I? = I and the set of
empty maximal spaces as ES = ?.
4: for t = 1 to n do
5: if t = 1 then
6: Select an item with largest surface area.
7: Put the item into the bin and generate 3 empty max-
imal spaces ES1. Update ES = ES1.
8: else
9: Select a item i from set S according to least waste
space heuristic(Algorithm 4). Update I? ? I? \ i.
10: Select an empty maximal space from ES and de-
cide the orientation according to Least surface Area
Heuristic(Algorithm 3).
11: Generate new empty maximal spaces(ES1)
and delete those that are intersected and
overlapped(ES2). Update ES ? ES
?
ES1 \
ES2.
12: end if
13: end for
14: Return the surface area of the bin that could pack all
items.
Algorithm 3 Least Surface Area Heuristic
1: Denote the set of empty maximal space as ES, the set of
orientations as O.
2: Initialize the least surface area for item i as LSAi = 3 ·
(max(li, wi, hi) · n)
2
.
3: Initialize best empty maximal space s?i = null, best ori-
entation as o?i = null.
4: for each empty maximal space s ? ES do
5: for each orientation o ? O do
6: Calculate the surface area SAi,s,o after putting item
i in empty maximal space s with orientation o.
7: if SAi,s,o < LSAi then
8: Update s?i = s, o?i = o and LSAi ? SAi,s,o.
9: else if SAi,s,o = LSAi then
10: Apply the tie-breaking rule. (Selecting s, o if and
only if min(length(s) ? o(li), width(s) ?
o(wi), height(s) ? o(hi)) is less than
min(length(si) ? oi(li), width(si) ?
oi(wi), height(si) ? oi(hi)), where
length(s), width(s), height(s) represents
the length, width, height of empty maximal space
s and o(li), o(wi), o(hi) represents the length,
width, height of item i with orientation o.)
11: end if
12: end for
13: end for
14: Return s?i, o?i for item i.
Algorithm 4 Least Waste Space Heuristic
1: Denote the set of remaining items as I? .
2: Denote the volume of item i as Vi.
3: Initialize the best item i? = null.
4: Initialize the Least volume as LV =
(max(li, wi, hi) · n)
3
.
5: for each item i ? I? do
6: Calculate the volume V after packing item i accord-
ing to s?i, o?i(which is determined by Least surface
Area Heuristic). Denote the least waste space of item
LWVi = V ? Vi.
7: if LWVi < LV then
8: Update LV = LWVi.
9: Update i? = i.
10: end if
11: end for
12: Return item i.
of the Base Item yields the total surface area is increased by
at least (W ·n ·max(xi))/(n ·max(wi)) = W . At the same
time, even if all the items are added on the upper side of the
Base Item, the total increased area is at most W . Thus, all the
items will be put on the upper side of the Base Item.
Next, we will prove the length and width of the item will
not be reversed. If reversing one item with width and length,
the increased area is at least W ·min(wi) for this item. How-
ever, the increased area is at most W for all items if no item
is reversed.
If we can find out a bin with least surface area to pack this
n+ 1 items, we find out the least number of bins of capacity
W that can contain n items of size w1, · · · , wn. Therefore, if
we can solve the new type of 2D BPP in polynomial time, the
one-dimensional bin packing problem can be solved in poly-
nomial time, which completes the proof that this new type of
2D BPP is NP-hard unless P = NP.
For the new type of 3D bin packing problem, we will add
length 1/(n ·max(wi))
2 for each item in the 2D case, which
will ensure no item will be added on the length side. Proof is
the same as the 2D case.
