 
arXiv preprint 
DeepBreath: Deep Learning of Breathing Patterns for Automatic Stress 
Recognition using Low-Cost Thermal Imaging in Unconstrained Settings 
Youngjun Cho, Nadia Bianchi-Berthouze 
UCL Interaction Centre, Faculty of Brain Sciences 
University College London 
London, United Kingdom 
{youngjun.cho.15, nadia.berthouze}@ucl.ac.uk 
Simon J. Julier 
Department of Computer Science 
University College London 
London, United Kingdom 
s.julier@ucl.ac.uk  
 
 
Abstract—We propose DeepBreath, a deep learning model which 
automatically recognises people’s psychological stress level 
(mental overload) from their breathing patterns. Using a low cost 
thermal camera, we track a person’s breathing patterns as 
temperature changes around his/her nostril. The paper’s technical 
contribution is threefold. First of all, instead of creating hand-
crafted features to capture aspects of the breathing patterns, we 
transform the uni-dimensional breathing signals into two 
dimensional respiration variability spectrogram (RVS) sequences. 
The spectrograms easily capture the complexity of the breathing 
dynamics. Second, a spatial pattern analysis based on a deep 
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) is directly applied to the 
spectrogram sequences without the need of hand-crafting features. 
Finally, a data augmentation technique, inspired from solutions for 
over-fitting problems in deep learning, is applied to allow the CNN 
to learn with a small-scale dataset from short-term measurements 
(e.g., up to a few hours). The model is trained and tested with data 
collected from people exposed to two types of cognitive tasks 
(Stroop Colour Word Test, Mental Computation test) with sessions 
of different difficulty levels. Using normalised self-report as 
ground truth, the CNN reaches 84.59% accuracy in discriminating 
between two levels of stress and 56.52% in discriminating between 
three levels. In addition, the CNN outperformed powerful shallow 
learning methods based on a single layer neural network. Finally, 
the dataset of labelled thermal images will be open to the 
community. 
 
1.   Introduction 
Our modern society suffers from psychological stress. 
Although the literature provides several definitions of stress, it 
is evident that various forms of stress influence our mental and 
physical health [1]–[3]. In this paper, we aim to contribute to 
the body of work on automatic detection of people’s stress 
levels for the long-term goal of technology-based stress 
management interventions (e.g., [4], [5], [6]). We propose 
DeepBreath, a deep learning model to automatically infer stress 
levels (mental overload in our study) from thermal imaging of 
people’s breathing patterns in unconstrained settings. Our novel 
automatic stress recognition system makes three contributions: 
1) a novel representation of breathing pattern dynamics; 2) a 
deep learning framework which does not require feature hand-
crafting and a data augmentation technique to learn with a 
small-scale dataset; 3) a proposal of low-cost thermal imaging 
as a ubiquitous stress sensor. These contributions are motivated 
below. 
Given that mental stress, defined here as “a load producing 
a complex pattern of effects on a body and a mind” [7], affects 
physiological processes [2], [8], [9], breathing among other 
physiological processes have been explored for automatic 
detection of stress (e.g., [6], [10], [11]). However, most of these 
works focuses on gross statistical features. In particular, in the 
case of breathing, average breathing rate (over a specified 
window) is the main features used [10], [11]. However, 
according to Grossman [9], breathing irregularity can also be 
observed in stressful situations. Here, we propose the use of bi-
dimensional spectrogram variability sequences to capture in a 
compact way the variability of breathing patterns over time.  
Our second contribution relies on the use of deep learning 
to eliminate the need for feature handcrafting. As discussed in 
[12], even carefully hand engineered-feature extractors could 
fail to generalize to unseen data sets. Hence we have turned to 
deep learning [12] to automatically find good features during 
the learning process. In this paper, we propose a novel approach 
to the “deep learning” of the relationship between the 
variability spectrogram sequences and mental stress levels. A 
key problem with deep learning is the requirement for the 
considerable amount of training data, which can be difficult and 
time consuming to obtain. To overcome this problem, we 
finally propose to use a unidirectional sliding cropper-based 
data augmentation algorithm inspired by deep learning 
solutions for over-fitting. 
Finally, our third contribution lays in the type of sensor 
used. Typically used technology for breathing tracking requires 
to wear sensors (e.g., chest belt, bracelets) [11] or to use RGB 
cameras [10] that raise privacy issues as well as lighting 
challenges. Thermal imaging can be free from those constraints 
while supporting breathing measurements [13]–[15]. Despite 
our approach to automatic stress detection is sensor-
independent, in this paper we investigate it through the use of a 
low-cost mobile thermal camera which was first investigated in 
[15] and is still quite an underexplored sensor in affective 
computing.  
 
 
The rest of the paper is organized as follow: we review the 
background work and present the technical details of the 
proposed DeepBreath method. Next, we summarise our 
experimental protocol and results. We conclude by discussing 
and comparing the performances of our new approach against 
shallow learning. 
2.   Background  
2.1.   Breathing and Stress 
Breathing is an important vital process controlled by the 
Autonomic Nervous System (ANS). The monitoring of 
breathing patterns can be informative of a person’s mental and 
physical condition. Researchers have investigated the 
possibility of using breathing signals together with other 
physiological signatures to automatically assess people’s stress 
level [6], [10], [11]. However, the results of these studies are 
unclear about the contribution of breathing features as 
compared to other physiological measures. For instance, with 
85% accuracy, McDuff et al. [10] show that in the binary 
classification of stress (i.e., rest and stress) using multiple 
physiological features (i.e., heart rate, breathing rate and heart 
rate variability (HRV)) the most informative feature is HRV 
with breathing rate playing a minor role. It is possible that 
breathing rate itself is not the best discriminating feature for 
respiration. Indeed, the direction of changes in respiration rate 
during stress is not so clear. For instance, while Masaoka et al. 
[16] identified an increase of breathing rate during mental stress, 
Hong et al. [11] reported a severe drop of the rate along with 
the stress. In addition, when exploring HRV, multiple 
parameters are computed to capture its complex dynamics. 
Given these results, we propose to explore the complexity of 
breathing patterns rather than just discrete rate.   
2.2.   Thermal imaging and affect detection 
Thermal imaging is a key non-contact method to study heat 
patterns of materials and organisms. Despite thermographic 
channels being still little explored in affective computing, 
various studies have explored the possible thermal signatures 
appearing in association with a person’s psychological affective 
states (e.g., [17]–[21]). For instance, Engert et al. [18] 
identified that a decrease of temperature of the nose tip and 
perioral areas could be a barometer of mentally stressful states. 
While most works (e.g., [17]–[19]) focused on attempting to 
confirm the relationship between directional changes in 
temperature of facial areas and affective states, a few works 
investigated how such thermal information can be used for 
automatic affect recognition (e.g., [20], [21]). For example, 
Nhan and Chau [20] used temperature changes on left, right 
supraorbital, periorbital, and nasal areas as features for 
distinguishing high arousal from a baseline.  
All the earlier works, however, employed very heavy and 
expensive thermographic systems, not easily to set up in any 
position and not easily portable. In addition, tools for thermal 
image processing (e.g., automated tracking of a Region-Of-
Interest (ROI)) were also limited (e.g., a dot stick was used for 
the tracking of a ROI in [20]), constraining its deployments 
(e.g., no head movement allowed, environments with stable 
temperature only). However, in a recent study [15], we have 
proposed a new ROI tracking method based on the Optimal 
Quantization technique and the Thermal Gradient Flow 
algorithm reaching extreme robustness in automatic tracking of 
breathing patterns in unconstrained settings comparable to the 
standard breathing belt. In addition, our study shows that the 
algorithm works with low-cost thermal cameras (e.g., Seek 
Thermal, FLIR One), portable and hence more suitable for real-
life situations.  We propose to build on this method to test the 
possibility of using low-cost camera to automatically detect 
stress levels from breathing during unconstrained sedentary 
mental tasks. 
2.3.   Deep learning for affective computing 
Deep learning, which is currently one of the most 
successfully and widely used approaches in Computer Vision 
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) [12], [22], [23], could be a 
potential solution for better understandings of physiological 
and behavioural patterns in relation to a person’s affective states 
(e.g., distress, anxiety). Earlier deep learning models have been 
explored to detect facial and voice affective expressions. For 
instance, Liu et al. [24] boosted the deep belief network for 
better characterization of features in relation to a certain type of 
facial expressions. Lane et al. [25] proposed a model which 
could analyse multiple large scale speech datasets using a 
coupled deep neural network for automated stress detection. 
These approaches have achieved greater performances in the 
classification problems, in comparison with shallow learning 
approaches (e.g., SVM, Gaussian mixture models). 
More recently, researchers have shown the power of 
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) based models (e.g., [22], 
[23], [26], [27]) in a variety of problems spanning from image 
classification to semantic segmentation, demonstrating that the 
models themselves can produce better learning performances 
than earlier deep learning approaches. These recent 
accomplishments in CNNs have been adopted to improve affect 
recognition performances for large scale datasets: for instance, 
arousal and valence prediction in audio [28], facial action unit 
identification [29], and facial expression recognition in video 
[30]. However, the small size of datasets generally available in 
affective computing, mostly involving the uni-dimensionality 
of physiological signals, do not easily allow the use of such 
techniques. Thus, in this paper, we propose a new two-
dimensional representation of breathing patterns capable of 
capturing the complexity of the patterns without feature 
crafting, and a data augmentation algorithm to enable the use 
of the CNN.  
 
3.   DeepBreath: Design and Algorithm 
This section presents the process used to collect, represent 
and augment the data, and describes the deep learning 
architecture. 
 
 
3.1.   Respiration Variability Spectrogram (RVS) 
collection from thermal imaging  
Figure 1 illustrates the process for collecting breathing 
patterns using a portable low-cost thermal imaging camera 
(dimension: 18mm x 26mm x 72mm). Thermal videos are 
captured using the camera attached to a smartphone placed at a 
maximum distance of 55cm from a person’s nostril area (i.e., 
our ROI) (figure 1a). We use the respiration tracking algorithm 
proposed in [15] to recover one-dimensional breathing signals 
from the nostril ROI on the thermal videos (see figure 1b).  
Figure 1c shows a two-dimensional spectrogram 
automatically transformed from one-dimensional signal 
sequences. This is for condensing dynamic information (i.e., 
respiration variability) into an image which we call the RVS. 
More specifically, a two dimensional spectrogram can be 
constructed by stacking a Power Spectral Density (PSD) vector 
of a short-time-window respiration signals (i.e., Equation (11) 
in [15]) over time until the end of recordings. The PSD function 
handles the short-time autocorrelation that identifies 
similarities between neighbouring signal patterns, being of use 
to examine respiration variations in a short period. The RVS 
can be expressed as:  
                     2ˆ ˆ( , ) ( , ) j fkwwk
RVS f t R k t e ??=?                 (1) 
where ˆ( , )wwR k t  is the short-time autocorrelation output of 
windowed breathing signals from Equation (10) in [15], k is a 
time lag to examine the similarity, t?  is the discrete time 
information (e.g., ˆ [1 ,100 ]t s s?  ), and f is the frequency 
domain information.  
For the implementation, as used in [15], the normal 
breathing frequency range of healthy adults, [f1=0.1Hz, 
f2=0.85Hz], was used to band-pass filter the input breathing 
signals in (1) for reducing magnitudes of frequencies beyond 
the range of interest.  f in (1) has the same range scale. The time 
length of the short-time window is set to 20 seconds and moves 
forwards in 1 second intervals. Lastly, so as to produce an 
integer RVS matrix (i.e., to be easily taken as a grey-image), we 
converted the frequency in 1 2[ , ]f f  into an integer in a new 
scale [1, m] (here, m=120) using a linear transformation 
( )y f= ? . Note that this new bi-dimensional input signature 
can be applicable to any types of breathing measurements (e.g., 
chest-belt, expensive high-definition thermal camera), in spite 
of our focus laid on low-cost low-definition thermal imaging. 
3.2.   Data augmentation  
In comparison with other physiological signatures (e.g., 
heart rate, EEG), breathing patterns usually have a narrow and 
low frequency bandwidth (e.g., between 0.1Hz and 0.85Hz]). 
In other words, it requires the collection of longer data sets to 
allow for a deep learning process to take place. One possibility 
is to use a pre-trained network which is trained on a larger 
dataset, which is known as an efficient way to learn small 
datasets [12]. However, low-level features learnt from other 
domains (e.g., ImageNet data [22]) may not fit breathing 
dynamic patterns. Inspired by basic transformation-based data 
augmentation methods in deep learning (e.g., cropping, zoom-
in) [22], we propose a unidirectional sliding cropper with a 
square window to augment the RVS dataset while preserving 
each label, defined as:  
         1( , ) ( ( ), )iI x y RVS y i x
?= ? + , {1,2,..., }x m?           (2)  
where maxˆ{1,2,..., 1}i t m? ? +   is in an ascending order (1 
second interval), m is the length of each unit image, y in (2) is 
inversely transformed (T-1) to f (in (1)), in turn producing 
maxˆ( 1)t m? +   images of size m x m x 1 (height x width x 
channel). With m set to 120 in Section 3.1, each unit 
spectrogram image has 120x120 size (Figure 2).  
3.3.   CNN architecture  
The architecture of our network is shown in Figure 3. It 
 
Figure. 2.  Proposed data augmentation technique using a uni-
directional sliding cropper with a 120x120 square window. The 
colour scale indicates the frequency magnitude (i.e., PSD).   
Figure. 1.  Process for the respiration variability 
spectrogram collection through thermal imaging.  
 
 
consists of two convolutional layers, two pooling layers and 
one fully connected layer. Although additional modifications 
can be applied to this basic form of CNN [27], our aim in this 
paper is to investigate the possibility of using deep learning to 
classify stress levels from physiological patterns. In addition, 
we aim to build a low computational cost deep learning network 
for running on an embedded or mobile system (e.g., Figure 5a). 
Each image patch of 120 x 120 is resized to 28 x 28 using a 
basic bi-cubic interpolation to be fed forward to the first 
convolutional layer. The size of the resized patch was chosen to 
use the CNN structure proposed in [27]: The first layer filters 
the input image with n kernels (this value is set along with the 
number of stress levels for classification in Section  5) of size 
5 x 5, the second convolutional layer has j kernels of size 5 x 5 
and each pooling layer has averaging filters of size 2 x 2 applied 
with a stride of 2. A sigmoid function, widely used in artificial 
neural networks, is connected to every convolutional and fully 
connected layer to induce non-linearity. In the case where a 
large dataset is available, a Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) can 
replace this to boost the learning speed [22]. The output of the 
final pooling layer is fully connected to each output neuron 
which corresponds to each targeted class. Stochastic gradient 
descent (SGD) is applied to supervised fine-tuning during back 
propagation to reflect classification errors on training data sets.  
4.   Study Design and Dataset  
To test the proposed approach, we have designed an 
experiment to induce different levels of stress in participants. 
The participants’ breathing patterns were continuously 
recorded during the experiment and in turn constitute the 
dataset (participants’ nostril area) for our study. The study 
procedure was approved by the Ethics Committee of University 
College London Interaction Centre. 
4.1.   Stress induction tasks  
Two widely used tasks for inducing mental stress were 
selected for our purpose: the Stroop Colour Word test [31] (e.g., 
used in [32]) (denoted as Stroop) and the mathematics test (e.g., 
used in [10], [11]]) (denoted as Math). Each task has both an 
easy and a difficult session to ensure a good spread of induced 
stress levels within each task. This was important as the tasks 
differed in the amount of verbal output and behaviour they 
required. In the Stroop task, all participants had to name the 
colour of a word. In the easy session of the first task, the 
meaning of a word and its font colour were all congruent (e.g., 
the word red written in red). In the difficult session, these were 
incongruent (e.g., the word yellow, but written in red). The 
Math task required the participants to repeatedly subtract 
(mentally) a certain number (e.g., 1, 13) from a four digit 
number (e.g., 5000): while the subtracted number was set to a 
two digit number (e.g., 13) in the difficult session of the second 
task, that was set to 1, transforming the subtraction test to an 
easy counting-down test for the easy session. It was expected 
that the difficult sessions in Math and Stroop tests would lead 
to higher cognitive load than the easy sessions. After each 
answer, participants received sound feedback to inform them 
whether the answer was correct or not. Before and after each of 
the task sessions, the participants were asked to fill a short 
questionnaire (denoted as Q in Figure 4) to report their stress 
level. All the tests were programmed and run in MATLAB 
(2015b, The MathWorks). The program sources are publicly 
released at http://youngjuncho.com/2017/ACII2017-open-
sources/.  
4.2.   Participants and procedure  
8 healthy adults (3 females) (aged 18-53 years, M=30.75, 
 
Figure. 3.  The proposed CNN architecture consisting of two convolutional layers, two pooling layers and one fully connected layer.  
 
Figure. 4.  Flow chart of the conducted study (*Counterbalanced in Latin squared design between easy and diffcult sessions). 
 
 
 
SD=10.22) were invited from the subject pool service of 
University College London. Each participant was given the 
information sheet and the informed consent form prior to data 
acquisition. The study took place in a quiet lab room with no 
distractions (and no temperature room control).  
The flow for our experimental design is shown in Figure 4. 
After a 5-minute relaxation period (i.e., Relax in Figure 4), each 
participant was asked to go through the two types of cognitively 
demanding tasks (i.e., Stroop, Math). Before and after each 
demanding task (i.e., during Q), all participants were instructed 
to rate the subjective feeling based on a continuous 10-cm 
Visual Analogue Scale (VAS). VAS is a standard approach used 
to avoid the non-parametric property of the Likert scale [33]. In 
this study, the main question was: “Did you feel mentally 
stressed?” (ranging from 0cm, not at all, to 10cm, very much). 
The easy and difficult sessions of each task type (i.e., Stroop 
1,2 and Math 1,2) were counter-balanced.  
The recording setup is shown in Figure 5. During the tests, 
each participant answered the task questions using a mouse on 
a laptop and was thermal-video-recorded using a low-cost 
thermal camera (FLIR One) connected to an Android 
smartphone. In the Stroop test condition, participants had to 
click-select the right answer among different colour options 
while pronouncing the colour aloud. Every question was shown 
for 1.5 seconds as in [32]. In the Math test condition, each 
participant typed an answer using a mouse on a virtual keypad 
(i.e., GUI in the screen). Each Math question was shown for 7.5 
seconds which was set based on a pilot study.   
The whole sessions took 63 minutes - 72 minutes per 
participant. The collected thermal videos were segmented 
according to the task and difficulty level they are related to. 
Using the techniques explained in Section 3.1 and 3.2, each 
video segment was transformed into an augmented set of 
spectrograms with the associated self-reported stress level (i.e., 
the scores reported at the end of each session). This process 
produced 3936 augmented input images of size 120 x 120 (i.e., 
an average of 492 (SD=91.49) for each 8 participant) which are 
publicly available in http://youngjuncho.com/datasets/.  
5.   Ground truth and stress classification  
The classifier attempts to classify stress into one of three 
stress classes: none, low and high. We developed this classifier 
in two stages. First, we normalised participants’ stress ratings 
to reflect inter-person variability in ratings (e.g., [34]). For each 
participant, the normalisation was based on feature scaling 
using his/her minimum and maximum scores. Second, we used 
k-mean algorithm to cluster the normalised scores into the three 
stress classes. We used k-means because it has been shown to 
be effective in dealing with self-reported ratings (e.g., [35], 
 
Figure. 5.  Experimental setup: a smart phone with a low-cost 
thermal camera was installed and running on the desk while each 
person participated in the tasks. The participant was not asked to 
constrained their movemengs. 
 
   (a) 
(b) 
Figure. 6. Normalised subjective VAS scores: (a) distribution of 
the self report per participant (95% confidence interval), (b) 
clustered results using k-means. Colours and shapes of each point 
indicate the task type and difficulty levels. (Easy: Stroop 1(S1) 
and Math 1(M1); Difficult: Stroop 2(S2), Math 2(M2)). 
 
Figure. 7.  Examples of respiration spectrograms clustered 
according to the participants’ clustered VAS scores: (a) No-stress, 
(b) Low-level stress, (c) High-level stress. 
 
 
[36]). The clusters were then used to label the breathing 
spectrogram dataset, i.e., each spectrogram was labelled using 
the cluster the person’s self-report belongs to. Figure 6 
summarises the results. As intended, the distribution of self-
reports (Figure 6a) shows different levels of perceived stress 
across each task session. Figure 6b shows the clustering of the 
normalised subjective ratings into the stress classes. Here we 
should remark that we used the data collected from the four task 
sessions (i.e., S1: easy Stroop, M1: easy Math, S2: difficult 
Stroop, M2: difficult Math) but not the ones from the initial 
relax period (widely used as baseline). There are rationales for 
this: First, the tasks effectively induced the different stress 
levels from no stress to the high level of stress given that there 
were significant differences between each pair of clustered 
groups (all t-test comparisons had p<0.001; none-low: 
t(18)=8.939, low-high:t(20)=13.390, none-high: t(20)=23.651). 
On the other hand, there were no significant differences 
between subjective ratings collected from the initial relax 
period and those clustered into no-stress group (t(16)=1.211, 
p=0.244), suggesting the no-stress ratings to be a good baseline. 
Second, the recognition of non-stress in the relax periods would 
have been easier because of the lack of verbalisation and 
movement (e.g., mouse clicking) which all could affect the 
breathing patterns (independently of stress levels) [11]. Indeed, 
the tasks including the easy and difficult sessions had been 
purposely designed to verify the robustness of the approach to 
work in verbal contexts and unconstrained sedentary movement 
settings and the use of the relax periods as baseline would have 
reduced the validity of the evaluation. 
Examples of the labelled data are shown in Figure 7. As 
discussed in the literature (e.g., [34]), physiological signals can 
vary strongly between people (e.g., S4 shows a particularly 
different spectrogram from the others, see Figure 7a). Although 
the breathing dynamics (i.e., variation patterns) are different 
between each individual, the higher the levels of stress a person 
felt, the more irregular the patterns appears to be. Nonetheless, 
it is not ignorable that the patterns labelled as high and low-
level stress share some similarities. For this reason, we also 
undertook a binary classification problem by combining the 
low-and high-level stress into a stress class to discriminate 
events of stress from no-stress.  
For the classification of breathing patterns using the 
presented architecture (see Section 3.3), the number (n) of 
kernels (i.e., filters) of the first convolutional layer was set to 
12 for the three-class classification (i.e., three levels of stress 
classification) and 9 for the binary classification. The number 
(j) of kernels of the second convolutional layer was set to 24 
and 18, respectively. In a training process, a fixed learning rate 
of 0.5 and a batch size of 50 were used for 300 epochs. For the 
in-depth evaluation of the performance of the proposed deep 
model, the three single-layer neural networks were 
implemented as shallow learning methods. The first single-
layer neural network (denoted as NN1) uses the resized image 
patches (i.e., 28x28 in the proposed model, see Figure 3) as 
input and includes one hidden layer of node size 30. The second 
shallow network (denoted as NN2) uses half-sized image 
patches (60x60) and a hidden layer of size 45. The last network 
(denoted as NN3) uses the original images (120x120) and a 
hidden layer of size 300. These shallow learning methods were 
run for both the binary and the three-class classification models. 
Finally, for the validation of all the networks, an 8-fold leave-
one-subject-out (LOSO) cross-validation was used. At every 
fold, all data sequences from the participants except for one 
were used to train the networks, and the data from the left out 
participant was used for testing. 
6.   Results  
The dataset is composed of the augmented breathing 
spectrogram sequences of size 120 (i.e., frequency range) x 120 
(window length) x 3936 (the number of two-dimensional 
 
Figure. 8.  Summary of classification accuracy for (a) three-class 
classification (i.e., none, low, high-level stress), (b) binary 
classification (i.e., no-stress, stress). CNN: 5 layers CNN using 
low resolution RVS images (28x28), NN1: single hidden layer 
using low resoultion RVS images (28x28), NN2: single hidden 
layer using medium resoultion RVS images (60x60), NN3: single 
hidden layer using high resoultion RVS images (120x120). 
 
 
 
Figure. 9.  Results from the three-class classification problem 
(None, Low, High-level stress): (a) 5 layers CNN (Deep 
Learning), (b) single layer neural network (Shallow Learning). 
Confusion matrices (each block consists of the sum and average 
over the LOSO cross validation results, the colour represents the 
number of each prediction (i.e., black: highest, white: lowest)).  
 
 
Figure. 10.  Results from the binary classification problem (No-
stress and stress): (a) 5 layers CNN, (b) single layer neural 
network. Confusion matrices (same  color coding as in Figure 9).   
 
 
spectrograms) and the stress labels (i.e., either with binary or 
three-class labels). Figure 8 summarises the accuracy results 
from the leave-one-subject-out cross validation (N=8) for both 
the three-class and the binary cases. The CNN results were 
compared with NN1, NN2, NN3 results to understand the 
contribution made by the deep learning method.  
Multi-levels stress recognition: the highest accuracy 
(M=56.52%, SD=17.58%) was achieved with the deep CNN 
model, while M=51.89% (SD=10.36%), M=51.02% (SD= 
8.33%), 53.65% (SD=10.39%) were the results from NN1, 
NN2, NN3, respectively. The average F1 scores across every 
participant were 61.33% (SD=19.71%), 57.64% (SD=13.90%), 
57.57% (SD=11.80%), 59.84% (SD=14.23%) for the proposed 
model, NN1, NN2, NN3 respectively. When comparing the 
deep CNN and NN1 which deal with the same input images of 
size 28x28, we found that the deep CNN was capable of 
predicting both the no-stress and the high-level-stress better 
than NN1 while NN1 produced a better result in predicting the 
low-level stress as shown in Figure 9.  
Binary stress recognition: the deep CNN produced a much 
higher accuracy (M=84.59%, SD=19.34%) than the shallow 
networks (NN1: M=74.89%, SD= 19.12%, NN2: M=74.81%, 
SD=17.58%, NN3: M=77.31%, SD=19.45%). The average F1 
scores across every participant were 87.22% (SD=16.32%), 
75.18% (SD=21.96%), 79.14% (SD=14.81%), 82.04% 
(SD=15.81%) for NN1, NN2, NN3 respectively. Compared to 
NN1, the deep CNN performed significantly better in 
predicting both the no-stress (713 corrected predictions from 
CNN and 467 from NN1) and stress states (2503 from CNN 
and 2406 from NN1) as shown in Figure 10. 
7.   Discussions  
The main aim of this paper was to contribute the design of 
a novel low-cost non-contact thermography based stress 
recognition system by going deeper into breathing dynamic 
patterns. With this goal, we also contribute a new input 
signature: respiration variation spectrogram condensing 
breathing dynamics, an automatic feature learning method 
supported by a deep learning framework, and a new thermal 
image dataset labelled with the stress levels from our structured 
multi-level stress induction tasks. 
The accuracy results of our study, show that the proposed 
deep learning-based stress recognition model produces better 
performances (84.59% (binary), 56.52% (multi-class)) than the 
best results from the shallow learning method (single-layer NN: 
77.31% (binary), 53.65% (multi-class)). However, those 
accuracy results were not significantly different. This may be 
related to the relatively small number of participants although 
this number was set reflecting [32]. Regardless of this 
differentiation of deep and shallow networks made in this 
evaluation, this is the first study aimed at learning breathing 
patterns to automatically recognise a person’s mental stress 
level without hand-engineered feature extractors which require 
in-depth domain knowledge and highly matured skills. In 
particular, our proposed respiration variability spectrogram 
inputs (RVSs) are able to capture the dynamic breathing 
information from a very short-lasting (e.g., a sudden drop and 
increase) to long-lasting respiration changes. The proposed 
convolutional kernels based model can support the feature 
learning of the inputs, and in turn, contribute to the accuracy of 
a unimodal model.  
Compared with the literature suggesting low discriminative 
power of breathing in discriminating between stress levels [10], 
the proposed model shows that respiration signals alone can 
lead to above chance levels in 3-classes recognition (i.e., high, 
low, no stress). In addition, in the case of binary recognition our 
performances are similar to the one reported in [10] with the 
difference that in [10] multiple physiological channels were 
used rather than just breathing. We suggest that our high 
performances are partially due to the use of breathing 
variability rather than just breathing rate. We hence expect that 
the combination of breathing variability with other signals may 
lead to further improvement in the recognition rate.  
Further improvements could be obtained through a more 
refined ground truth (e.g., continuous over each session), 
improved normalisation of the subjective ratings and by 
considering inter-person variability (e.g., Figure 7). Finally, 
despite the fact that the evaluation tasks did not require large 
movement, people were free to move as needed (e.g., inputting 
their responses, or displaying stress related expressions e.g. 
turning or bending the head to escape the source of stress and 
frustration [37]). We expect, that even larger movements would 
be acceptable as the ROI tracking was tested in [15] in highly 
mobile contexts and high thermal environmental changes.  
8.   Conclusion 
DeepBreath is a novel stress recognition system based on 
deep learning and low-cost thermal imaging. Our main 
contributions – a new bi-dimensional signature condensing 
complex breathing dynamics, a new data augmentation 
method-based deep feature learning and the exploration of the 
low-cost thermal imaging for real-world ubiquitous affect 
recognition - were thoroughly evaluated through a multi-level, 
multi-task stress induction study. To the best of our knowledge, 
this is the first use of a deep learning-applied approach on 
breathing dynamic patterns. The results show high 
performances in automatic stress detection under unconstrained 
settings (i.e., verbal expressions and movement). 
Acknowledgments  
Youngjun Cho was supported by University College 
London Overseas Research Scholarship (UCL-ORS) awarded 
to top quality international postgraduate students. This work 
was partially supported by H2020-Human Project (ID: 723737 
- http://www.humanmanufacturing.eu/).  
References 
[1] B. S. McEwen, “Physiology and Neurobiology of Stress and 
Adaptation: Central Role of the Brain”, Physiol. Rev., vol. 87, no. 
3, pp. 873–904, Jul. 2007. 
 
 
[2] J. M. Nash and R. W. Thebarge, “Understanding Psychological 
Stress, Its Biological Processes, and Impact on Primary 
Headache”, Headache J. Head Face Pain, vol. 46, no. 9, pp. 
1377–1386, Oct. 2006. 
[3] A. F. T. Arnsten, “Stress signalling pathways that impair 
prefrontal cortex structure and function”, Nat. Rev. Neurosci., vol. 
10, no. 6, pp. 410–422, Jun. 2009. 
[4] P. J. Pretty, J. Peacock, M. Sellens, and M. Griffin, “The mental 
and physical health outcomes of green exercise”, Int. J. Environ. 
Health Res., vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 319–337, Oct. 2005. 
[5] H. Lu et al., “StressSense: Detecting Stress in Unconstrained 
Acoustic Environments Using Smartphones”, in Proceedings of 
the 2012 ACM Conference on Ubiquitous Computing, 2012, pp. 
351–360. 
[6] J. A. Healey and R. W. Picard, “Detecting stress during real-world 
driving tasks using physiological sensors”, IEEE Trans. Intell. 
Transp. Syst., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 156–166, Jun. 2005. 
[7] R. S. Lazarus, “From psychological stress to the emotions: A 
history of changing outlooks”, Annu. Rev. Psychol., vol. 44, p. 1, 
1993. 
[8] J. F. Brosschot, W. Gerin, and J. F. Thayer, “The perseverative 
cognition hypothesis: A review of worry, prolonged stress-related 
physiological activation, and health”, J. Psychosom. Res., vol. 60, 
no. 2, pp. 113–124, Feb. 2006. 
[9] P. Grossman, “Respiration, Stress, and Cardiovascular Function’, 
Psychophysiology, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 284–300, May 1983. 
[10] D. J. McDuff, J. Hernandez, S. Gontarek, and R. W. Picard, 
“COGCAM: Contact-free Measurement of Cognitive Stress 
During Computer Tasks with a Digital Camera”, in Proceedings 
of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems, 2016, pp. 4000–4004. 
[11] J.-H. Hong, J. Ramos, and A. K. Dey, “Understanding 
Physiological Responses to Stressors During Physical Activity”, 
in Proceedings of the 2012 ACM Conference on Ubiquitous 
Computing, 2012, pp. 270–279. 
[12] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning”, Nature, 
vol. 521, no. 7553, pp. 436–444, May 2015. 
[13] R. Murthy and I. Pavlidis, “Noncontact measurement of breathing 
function”, IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Mag., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 57–67, 
May 2006. 
[14] C. B. Pereira, X. Yu, M. Czaplik, R. Rossaint, V. Blazek, and S. 
Leonhardt, “Remote monitoring of breathing dynamics using 
infrared thermography”, Biomed. Opt. Express, vol. 6, no. 11, pp. 
4378–4394, Nov. 2015. 
[15] Y. Cho, S. J. Julier, N. Marquardt, and N. Bianchi-Berthouze, 
“Robust tracking of respiratory rate in high-dynamic range scenes 
using mobile thermal imaging”, Biomed. Opt. Express, 2017. 
[16] Y. Masaoka and I. Homma, “Anxiety and respiratory patterns: 
their relationship during mental stress and physical load”, Int. J. 
Psychophysiol., vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 153–159, Sep. 1997. 
[17] H. Genno et al., “Using facial skin temperature to objectively 
evaluate sensations”, Int. J. Ind. Ergon., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 161–
171, Feb. 1997. 
[18] V. Engert, A. Merla, J. A. Grant, D. Cardone, A. Tusche, and T. 
Singer, “Exploring the Use of Thermal Infrared Imaging in 
Human Stress Research”, PLOS ONE, vol. 9, no. 3, p. e90782, 
Mar. 2014. 
[19] C. Puri, L. Olson, I. Pavlidis, J. Levine, and J. Starren, 
“StressCam: Non-contact Measurement of Users’ Emotional 
States Through Thermal Imaging”, in CHI ’05 EA, 2005, pp. 
1725–1728. 
[20] B. R. Nhan and T. Chau, “Classifying Affective States Using 
Thermal Infrared Imaging of the Human Face”, IEEE Trans. 
Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 979–987, Apr. 2010. 
[21] M. M. Khan, R. Ward, and M. Ingleby, “Toward Use of Facial 
Thermal Features in Dynamic Assessment of Affect and Arousal 
Level”, IEEE Tr.. Affect. Comp.., vol. PP, no. 99, pp. 1–1, 2016. 
[22] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “ImageNet 
Classification with Deep Convolutional Neural Networks”, in 
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 25, 2012, pp. 
1097–1105. 
[23] C. Szegedy et al., “Going Deeper With Convolutions”, in the 
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and 
Pattern Recognition, 2015, pp. 1–9. 
[24] P. Liu, S. Han, Z. Meng, and Y. Tong, “Facial Expression 
Recognition via a Boosted Deep Belief Network”, in the 
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and 
Pattern Recognition, 2014, pp. 1805–1812. 
[25] N. D. Lane, P. Georgiev, and L. Qendro, “DeepEar: Robust 
Smartphone Audio Sensing in Unconstrained Acoustic 
Environments Using Deep Learning”, in ACM International Joint 
Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing, 2015, pp. 
283–294. 
[26] M. Lin, Q. Chen, and S. Yan, “Network In Network”, arXiv 
preprint arXiv: 1312.4400, 2013. 
[27] Y. LeCun and Y. Bengio, “Convolutional Networks for Images, 
Speech, and Time Series”, in Handbook of Brain Theory and 
Neural Networks, M. A. Arbib, Ed. MIT Press, 1995, p. 3361. 
[28] G. Trigeorgis et al., “Adieu features? End-to-end speech emotion 
recognition using a deep convolutional recurrent network”, in 
2016 IEEE Inter. Conf. on Acoustics, Speech and Signal 
Processing (ICASSP), 2016, pp. 5200–5204. 
[29] S. Ghosh, E. Laksana, S. Scherer, and L. P. Morency, “A multi-
label convolutional neural network approach to cross-domain 
action unit detection”, in Inter. Conf. on Affective Computing and 
Intelligent Interaction (ACII), 2015, pp. 609–615. 
[30] Z. Yu and C. Zhang, “Image Based Static Facial Expression 
Recognition with Multiple Deep Network Learning”, in ACM on 
Inter. Conf. on Multimodal Interaction, 2015, pp. 435–442. 
[31] J. R. Stroop, “Studies of interference in serial verbal reactions”, 
J. Exp. Psychol., vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 643–662, 1935. 
[32] T. Åkerstedt et al., “Comparison of urinary and plasma 
catecholamine responses to mental stress”, Acta Physiol. Scand., 
vol. 117, no. 1, pp. 19–26, Jan. 1983. 
[33] P. E. Bijur, W. Silver, and E. J. Gallagher, “Reliability of the 
Visual Analog Scale for Measurement of Acute Pain”, Acad. 
Emerg. Med., vol. 8, no. 12, pp. 1153–1157, Dec. 2001. 
[34] J. Hernandez, R. R. Morris, and R. W. Picard, “Call Center Stress 
Recognition with Person-Specific Models”, in Affective 
Computing and Intelligent Interaction, 2011, pp. 125–134. 
[35] C. Salmivalli, A. Kaukiainen, L. Kaistaniemi, and K. M. J. 
Lagerspetz, “Self-Evaluated Self-Esteem, Peer-Evaluated Self-
Esteem, and Defensive Egotism as Predictors of Adolescents’ 
Participation in Bullying Situations”, Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull., 
vol. 25, no. 10, pp. 1268–1278, Oct. 1999. 
[36] K. Kjeldstadli et al., “Life satisfaction and resilience in medical 
school – a six-year longitudinal, nationwide and comparative 
study”, BMC Med. Educ., vol. 6, p. 48, Sep. 2006. 
[37] A. Kleinsmith and N. Bianchi-Berthouze, “Affective Body 
Expression Perception and Recognition: A Survey”, IEEE Trans. 
Affect. Comput., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 15–33, Jan. 2013. 
