Vector Space Model as Cognitive Space for Text
Classification
Barathi Ganesh HB, Anand Kumar M and Soman K
Center for Computational Engineering and Networking
Amrita School of Engineering, Coimbatore
Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, Amrita University, India
barathiganesh.hb@gmail.com, m anandkumar@cb.amrita.edu,
kp soman@amrita.edu
Abstract
In this era of digitization, knowing the user’s sociolect aspects have become essen-
tial features to build the user specific recommendation systems. These sociolect
aspects could be found by mining the user’s language sharing in the form of text
in social media and reviews.
This paper describes about the experiment that was performed in PAN Author
Profiling 2017 shared task. The objective of the task is to find the sociolect aspects
of the users from their tweets. The sociolect aspects considered in this experiment
are user’s gender and native language information. Here user’s tweets written in
a different language from their native language are represented as Document -
Term Matrix with document frequency as the constraint. Further classification is
done using the Support Vector Machine by taking gender and native language as
target classes. This experiment attains the average accuracy of 73.42% in gender
prediction and 76.26% in the native language identification task.
1 Introduction
The user profiling is an indirect crowd sourcing task, which collect user’s sociolect aspects like age,
gender and language variation from their language share (i.e. Tweets, Face book data and Reviews)
1 2. Knowing the user’s sociolect aspects paves way to enrich the performance of recommendation
systems, targeted internet advertising, consumer behavior analysis and forensic science. This work
is focused on mining of sociolect aspects like gender and language variation (native language) from
the user’s (author’s) tweets by having their word usage as an evidence [1][8].
PAN - 2017 author profiling task is to predict the author’s gender and language variation from their
tweets which are 100 in number [1]. This task can be viewed as a text classification problem by
having target class as the author’s sociolect aspects and text as their tweets. The primary component
in the text classification problem are representation, feature learning and classification. Here we
have modelled the Vector Space Model (VSM) as the author’s cognition 3 as cognitive space 4
through the Document - Term Matrix (DTM) representation and feature learning methods. The
further prediction of gender and language variation is done through the Support Vector Machine
(SVM) based classification.
Most of the recent researches are focused on representing the context of the text through distribu-
tional and distributed text representation methods [2] [3] [4]. This context representation of text
1http://pan.webis.de/clef17/pan17-web/author-profiling.html
2http://ttg.uni-saarland.de/resources/DSLCC/
3en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cognition
4dictionary.sensagent.com/cognitive%20space/en-en/
1
ar
X
iv
:1
70
8.
06
06
8v
1 
 [
cs
.C
L
] 
 2
1 
A
ug
 2
01
7
Figure 1: Word frequency used by the users with respect to the gender
alone will not contribute much towards the prediction of authors sociolect aspects, since it is also
dependent on their source of cognitive knowledge like education, cultural background, age group,
working domain etc [5]. In this Author Profiling task ”How” language sharing expressed by an
author is having more impact than the ”What” they actually shared [5]. By observing this, here
the Document - Term Matrix (DTM) is used as representation method, in which the fundamental
features are words and their frequencies used by the users.
Figure 2: Word frequency used by the users with respect to the native language
The Figure 1 and 2 describes the variation in word frequency with respect to the gender and native
language of the users. It can be observed that usage of word and its frequency varies with respect to
the user’s sociolect aspects. The frequency of the word used by female is significantly greater than
the word used by male. As told above cognitive nature is applicable to native language variation
also. We have experimented VSM to model this cognition ability. The words in these Figure 1 and
2 are derived by taking common word across the target classes from the list of words with top 20
highest frequency in the final model. The above shown Figure 1 and 2 has been plotted for English
language which is also applicable to the other languages.
2 Text Representation - Vector Space Model
Vector Space Model is built from the documents provided. These set of documents are processed to
find its equivalent optimized numerical representation in the matrix format.
D = d1, d2, d3, ..., dn (1)
2
Here d represents the sentences or documents (here tweets), D represents its equivalent matrix
format (here DTM) and n is the total number of documents.
The commonly used methods under VSM are Document - Term Matrix (DTM) and Term Frequency
- Inverse Document Frequency Matrix (TF-IDF). These methods are generally referred to as Bag of
Word (BOW) method and it follows bag of word hypothesis [6]. In our methodology, TF-IDF is not
taken into consideration because, the control over the document frequency and term significance are
modeled through minimum document frequency.
Given a set of texts as in equation 1, the function f() converts it into the Document Term Matrix
(DTM). In this application document refers to the user’s tweet collection, hence the matrix can be
viewed as user - term matrix. The function f() measures the event e, where e is the occurrence
of terms in the texts. The term may take words, phrases (n-grams) or both. The above can be
represented as,
D = f(e) if e > k (2)
Where D is the DTM with m × n size. m is the number of users, k is the minimum document
frequency and n is the total number of unique words or phrases (types) present in the document set.
The word with frequency < k is not included in the DTM.
3 Feature Learning
Feature learning is the abstract level representation of original text content. This enhances the model
performance by filtering the unwanted information and reduces the computation time required to
build the model. In this work, frequency of the word across the document (document frequency)
is taken as the threshold to limit the number of unique words in the vocabulary to build the user -
term matrix [6]. The terms in the vocabulary are constrained by the document frequency. Hence the
matrix produced through this can be viewed as user - feature matrix. In the produced matrix row
refers to the user and column refer to the word used by the user. The following Feature Scaling table
gives the comparison between number of words in user - term matrix and user - feature matrix.
Language User - Term User - Feature
Matrix Matrix
English 322412 14074
Spanish 420563 6038
Portuguese 98490 20474
Arabic 333646 17773
Table 1: Feature Scaling
4 Classification
This experiment does not focus on classification rather than the representation of texts. Therefore
the user - feature matrix along with its corresponding target classes are used to train the Support
Vector Machine (SVM) classifier with Radial Basis Function (RBF) as the kernal. SVM is a well
known non probabilistic classification algorithm which is used most often to perform the VSM based
representations [7]. SVM with the default parameter in Scikit Learn library is directly used to build
the classifier (i.e. C = 1.0, degree=3, gamma=’auto’, kernel=’rbf’ ).
5 Experiments and Observations
This section details the statistics about the given training data set, experimented system and its
outcomes. This experiment is conducted with a machine having Intel i7 processor and 16GB of
RAM.
The data set contains 100 tweets per author and these tweets are written in 4 different languages.
Within these different languages, native language of the users also varies. The detailed statistics
about the data-set utilized is given in PAN 2017 Author Profiling overview paper [1]. The number
of variation in the native language is shown in Data - Set Statistics Table. These 100 tweets per
3
Language # Native Language Total #
Classes Tweets
English 6 6,000
Spanish 7 7,000
Portuguese 2 2000
Arabic 4 4,000
Table 2: Data-set statistics: Classes
author is embedded in an xml file and given with the truth file which contains gender and language
variation class of the corresponding author. These xml files are passed through xml Python library
5 as a document object model and tweets are extracted out of it. These 100 tweets per author is
then concatenated to form a single document per author. By taking white space as the delimiter,
tokenization has been performed and Count Vectorizer from SKLEARN python library 6 used to
build the DTM. Here document in a row is referred to as the user.
The User - Feature Matrix with the class tags are given to the SVM with Radial Basis Function kernal
(RBF Kernal) and C = 1 to build the classification models. An independent two classification
models are build for the gender prediction and identification of Language variation. To build the
classifier SVM from the SKLEARN Python library 7 is utilized. To ensure the performance a 10-fold
10-cross validation is performed and the average accuracy of the 10-validation scores are calculated
to find the final accuracy. This can be represented as,
Accuracy =
correctly predicted authors
total authors
(3)
Average Accuracy =
?10
i=1 Accuracyi
10
(4)
The above said experiment is conducted with minimum document frequency varying between 2 and
25 while representing tweets as User - Feature Matrix. The final classification model is built by
selecting the minimum document frequency with highest accuracy across all four languages. Here
minimum document frequency acts as a constraint in the selection of words to build a vocabulary.
The minimum document frequency is an event of frequency of the word appearing across the docu-
ments (i.e. minimum number of users who used the given word). The performance of the model built
against the minimum document frequency is given in the Figures 3 and 4. It can be observed that
the performance of the models has attained the constant accuracy for the minimum document fre-
quency greater than 4. From this observation in this experiment final model is built with ”minimum
document frequency = 10”.
Figure 3: Accuracy of the model with respect to the minimum document frequency
5docs.python.org/2/library/xml.etree.elementtree.html
6scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.feature extraction.text.CountVectorizer.html
7scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.svm.SVC.html
4
Figure 4: Accuracy of the model with respect to the minimum document frequency
As the minimum document frequency increases the size of the User - Feature Matrix gets reduced.
This is because the number of words to form the vocabulary is less. This has a significant impact on
time to build the classification model. This is shown in the Figure 5 and 6.
Figure 5: Time taken to build the model with respect to the minimum document frequency
Figure 6: Time taken to build the model with respect to the minimum document frequency
The User - Feature Matrix of the test data is built against the selected classification model’s vocab-
ulary and thereafter gender, language variations are predicted. The result obtained against the test
data are evaluated by the PAN 2017 Author Profiling shared task committee and it is shown in Table
3 8. It can be observed that, the highest performance was attained for Portuguese language and low-
est for English language. This is because of the significance of number of native language variation
within the language. On the whole, this experimentation attains nearly 70% of accuracy for all the
languages in both the tasks.
8http://pan.webis.de/clef17/pan17-web/author-profiling.html
5
Language Gender Native Language
Max Min Ours Max Min Ours
En 0.82 0.54 0.78 0.90 0.19 0.60
Es 0.83 0.64 0.72 0.96 0.35 0.77
Pt 0.87 0.61 0.75 0.99 0.91 0.97
Ar 0.80 0.59 0.68 0.83 0.45 0.71
Table 3: Results Statistics
6 Conclusion
The word usage by the users have been represented in the cognitive space by Document - Term
Matrix as Vector Space Model. By considering word usage as features, further classification has
been carried out using Support Vector Machine. The observed results have attained nearly an average
accuracy of 70 % in both the tasks across different languages. From the assumptions made it has
been found that these primary results are satisfactory and that Vector Space Model can be considered
as the user’s Cognitive Space.
The accuracy of the system can be enriched by representing the tweets using Vector Space Models
of Semantics (distributional and distributed representation methods). Our further experimentation
will be on deriving the Vector Space Models of Semantics representation methods for modelling the
user’s cognitive space from the representation method utilized in this paper.
References
[1] Rangel, Francisco, Paolo Rosso, Martin Potthast, and Benno Stein. Overview of the 5th Author
Profiling Task at PAN 2017: Gender and Language Variety Identification in Twitter. Working
Notes Papers of the CLEF (2017).
[2] Barathi Ganesh HB, Anand Kumar M and Soman KP. Distributional Semantic Representation
for Text Classification and Information Retrieval. 2016.
[3] Barathi Ganesh HB, Reshma U and Anand Kumar M. Author identification based on word distri-
bution in word space. In Advances in Computing, Communications and Informatics (ICACCI),
2015.
[4] Socher, Richard, Eric H. Huang, Jeffrey Pennin, Christopher D. Manning, and Andrew Y. Ng.
Dynamic pooling and unfolding recursive autoencoders for paraphrase detection.. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2011.
[5] Barathi Ganesh HB, Anand Kumar M and Soman KP. Statistical Semantics in Context Space.
2016.
[6] Turney, Peter D., and Patrick Pantel. From frequency to meaning: Vector space models of se-
mantics. Journal of artificial intelligence research 37 (2010).
[7] Hsu, Chih-Wei, Chih-Chung Chang, and Chih-Jen Lin. A practical guide to support vector
classification. 2003.
[8] Tan, Liling and Zampieri, Marcos and Ljubes?ic, Nikola and Tiedemann, Jo?rg. Merging Compa-
rable Data Sources for the Discrimination of Similar Languages: The DSL Corpus Collection.
Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Building and Using Comparable Corpora (BUCC) (2014).
6
