Distantly Supervised Road Segmentation
Satoshi Tsutsui?
Indiana University
stsutsui@indiana.edu
Tommi Kerola
Preferred Networks, Inc.
tommi@preferred.jp
Shunta Saito
Preferred Networks, Inc.
shunta@preferred.jp
Abstract
We present an approach for road segmentation that only
requires image-level annotations at training time. We lever-
age distant supervision, which allows us to train our model
using images that are different from the target domain. Us-
ing large publicly available image databases as distant su-
pervisors, we develop a simple method to automatically
generate weak pixel-wise road masks. These are used to
iteratively train a fully convolutional neural network, which
produces our final segmentation model. We evaluate our
method on the Cityscapes dataset, where we compare it with
a fully supervised approach. Further, we discuss the trade-
off between annotation cost and performance. Overall, our
distantly supervised approach achieves 93.8% of the perfor-
mance of the fully supervised approach, while using orders
of magnitude less annotation work.
1. Introduction
Classifying each pixel as corresponding to a road or not
is an essential task for practical autonomous driving sys-
tems. While basic research on fine-grained segmentation
for autonomous driving has been explored previously [8], a
practical driving system does not necessarily require seg-
mentation (i.e., pixel-wise classification) for most static
or moving traffic objects. For objects such as vehicles,
pedestrians, and traffic signs, localizing them with bound-
ing boxes is sufficient for achieving satisfactory information
for the autonomous driving task. The pixel-wise classifica-
tion is, however, necessary for the road itself, which is the
region where a car is able to drive safely. With this mo-
tivation in mind, this paper focuses on segmenting road in
an image taken from a car centric image. That is, an im-
age taken from a monocular front-facing camera placed on
the ego-car. We note that a car centric road image is funda-
mentally different from a general road image, which can be
taken from various perspectives, including aerial views. A
car centric image, on the other hand, always has the same
?The work was done while the author was an intern at Preferred Net-
works, Inc.
Figure 1. Overview of our method. From a car centric image, we
extract superpixels and saliency that is trained from general im-
ages different from car centric images. These are then combined
to generate an initial weak segmentation mask. This mask is then
used for training an FCN, which results in an accurate road seg-
mentation result. Our method operates without any pixel-wise an-
notations and only requires a set of image-level labels at training
time.
perspective view, where the car body is clearly visible as a
constant part of each image.
State-of-the-art segmentation algorithms use fully con-
volutional neural networks (FCNs), assuming that an abun-
dance of annotated images is available for training [6, 32,
19]. While FCNs can benefit from the progress of modern
GPUs or optimized chips, the cost for obtaining annotations
is still a bottleneck, requiring much manual work. The cost
for segmentation annotation is actually one of the highest
compared to other vision-related tasks. For example, the
cost to obtain a segmentation mask annotation for an object
in an image is reported to be about 80 seconds, whereas an
image label annotation only requires one second [7]. It is
also reported that pixel-level road image annotation needs
1.5 hours per image, including quality control [8]. This
is our motivation to develop a method that is able to train
FCNs without using pixel-wise annotations. In this way, the
annotation cost is greatly reduced by enabling training with
only image-label labels, which is called weakly supervised
segmentation.
ar
X
iv
:1
70
8.
06
11
8v
1 
 [
cs
.C
V
] 
 2
1 
A
ug
 2
01
7
Recent work on weakly supervised segmentation em-
ploys a convolutional neural network (CNN) trained with
image-level labels for the task of classification [28, 17, 9,
27, 28], and utilizes a saliency map that highlights the pix-
els contributing to the classification results [33]. However,
this approach cannot directly be applied to road segmenta-
tion using car centric images, as in all images, the road is
visible, which would make it impossible to train a classifier,
since we have no negative samples. Even if we collect non-
road images and train a binary classifier, the saliency map
would highlight the non-road objects that always appear in
the car centric image (e.g, the car body). An idea for cir-
cumventing this is to learn saliency making use of existing
image databases different from the car centric domain.
This is called learning with distant supervision [21]. Dis-
tant supervision was originally proposed for reducing the
cost of annotating sentences in natural language processing.
This technique automatically annotates sentences, making
use of existing databases, such as Wikipedia, and use these
possibly noisy or weak annotations for training machine
learning algorithms.
In this work, we propose to make use of existing im-
age databases different from the car centric domain to train
FCNs for road segmentation, and empirically show its per-
formance and challenges. We collect road and non-road
images different from the car centric images, by selecting
labels from the ImageNet [26] and Places [34] datasets.
Thus, our practical annotation cost boils down to selecting
labels from these databases. The selected images are used
for training CNNs that can be used for obtaining saliency
maps for target road images. These saliency maps are used
to generate (noisy and weak) pixel-wise annotations, which
are used for training FCNs for road segmentation. It should
be noted that our approach is not dependent on the specific
architecture of FCNs, nor does it require any modification
to it.
Our experiments on the Cityscapes dataset [8] show that
our approach can achieve 93.8% of the performance of a
fully-supervised approach, while requiring orders of mag-
nitude less annotation work. To the best of our knowl-
edge, this is the first paper that reports the performance of
a weakly supervised approach to train FCNs for road seg-
mentation.
In summary, we make the following contributions:
• We propose an approach for distantly supervised road
segmentation, which does not require any annotation
of car centric images, making use of existing image-
level label databases.
• Using the Cityscapes dataset [8], we compare our
approach with fully supervised segmentation, pro-
vide quantitative and qualitative evaluations, and dis-
cuss the trade-off between annotation cost and perfor-
mance.
2. Related Work
Fully supervised semantic segmentation Semantic seg-
mentation of general objects has been a major part of the
computer vision community ever since the PASCAL VOC
challenge in 2007 [10]. While various methods have been
proposed for this task, a significant breakthrough came in
2014, when end-to-end learning with FCNs was shown to
be possible for this task [20]. Their general framework
for end-to-end semantic segmentation was formulated as
an encoder network followed by a decoder network. Seg-
Net [6] improved upon this work by introducing an upsam-
pling method that reflects the pooling indices used in the
encoder network. This resulted in higher quality output fea-
ture maps. Also, since no parameters are used in the up-
sampling step, this network is more light-weight than the
previous methods at the time. U-Net [25] is another re-
cent method that uses a ladder-like structure for concate-
nating feature maps from the encoder and decoder, together
with skip connections that allow the decoder to keep de-
tails that were previously lost when being pooled in the de-
coder. Later, the fully convolutional DenseNet [14] was
proposed, which extended U-Net by using the parameter-
efficient DenseNet [13] as its base encoder, which resulted
in a lightweight model that still achieves high quality seg-
mentation results. PSPNet [32] steered away from the need
of downsampling in the encoder network, and instead used
dilated convolutions to keep the feature map at a high res-
olution. Global context was then aggregated by leveraging
spatial pyramid pooling. Contrary to this, RefineNet [19]
proposed to use long-range residual connections in order
to exploit all available information throughout the down-
sampling process. This enabled deeper layers to capture
fine-grained semantic information by using the convolution
input directly from the earlier layers.
Weakly supervised semantic segmentation Distantly
supervised segmentation falls into a category of weakly su-
pervised segmentation. Previous work utilizes various weak
supervisors such as points [7], scribbles [18], bounding
boxes [16], or just image-level labels [28, 17, 9, 27, 28].
In this work, we are interested in the last one: learning seg-
mentation models from just image-level labels. Here we
review FCN-based approaches as they are the backbone of
the state-of-the-art results.
Early studies view the problem as a multiple instance
learning [24, 23]. In this problem, a label is assigned to
a set of features, and the pixel level predictions are aggre-
gated into per image prediction losses [4]. However, it fails
to consider object localization information that is implic-
itly learned by an FCN, which is done in the following re-
search as well as in our approach [33]. Saleh et al. [27]
use an object saliency map (or objectness) learned by clas-
sification CNNs. Shimoda and Yanai [28] proposed a
method for extracting a class-specific saliency map us-
ing gradient-based optimization, and utilized it for seg-
mentation. Kolesnikov and Lampert [17] proposed sev-
eral loss functions for weakly supervised segmentation, tak-
ing advantage of localization cues learned by FCNs. Du-
rand et al. [9] proposed an FCN architecture for learning
better localization information.
A related approach to ours is webly supervised seman-
tic segmentation [15], which can be regarded as a specific
type of distantly supervised segmentation. It collects three
sets of images: images of objects with white background,
images of common background scenes, and images of ob-
jects with common background scenes. These three sets are
effectively used to train FCNs. It is effective for segment-
ing foreground objects (e.g. car) but unlike our approach, it
is not applicable for background objects like road, because
it is not practical to collect road images with white back-
ground.
Road segmentation Road segmentation is often called
free space estimation in autonomous driving. Free space
is defined as space where a vehicle can drive safely without
collision. Free space estimation is often solved by a ge-
ometric modeling approach, using more information such
as stereo or consistency between frames [5, 31]. The con-
sistency is also used in traditional monocular vision ap-
proaches [2]. Other traditional approaches from monocu-
lar vision employ classifiers based on manually defined fea-
tures [3, 12]. These features are learned by CNNs in modern
approaches. The early work with CNNs utilizes a generic
segmentation dataset for the road segmentation problem [1].
The CNN at that time was patch-based, and was not as so-
phisticated as the state-of-the-art FCNs. Oliveira et al. [22]
investigated the performance of modern CNNs for road seg-
mentation, and demonstrated its efficiency. While these ap-
proaches require pixel-wise annotations, we focus on the
problem of training a road segmentation CNN only with im-
age label annotations.
3. Method
This section describes our approach for distantly super-
vised road segmentation using only image-level labels. The
key point is that we make use of publicly available large
image databases, do not need to annotate the car centric im-
ages, and only need to select some labels that correspond to
road and non-road. After acquiring road and non-road im-
ages as distant supervisors, we use these for obtaining initial
weak segmentation masks. For the initial segmentation, we
employ a very simple approach in order to explore the per-
formance of distant supervision for road segmentation. We
note that while previous work [9, 17] provide more sophis-
ticated methods to train FCNs from image-level labels, we
intentionally use a much simpler method in this work, as it
is enough for illustrating our framework’s proof of concept.
Our initial segmentation masks are obtained by combin-
ing a saliency map and superpixels. The saliency map is
acquired from a road classification CNN. The superpixels
are needed because the saliency map is not sufficiently fine-
grained for generating a sharp segmentation mask. Finally,
the weak road segmentation result is used as weak labels for
training an FCN for generating higher quality road segmen-
tation masks. Each of the steps are explained in detail in the
following paragraphs.
Collect road and non-road images We collect road and
non-road images for training a road image classification
CNN. Non-road images are needed because all the images
taken by a camera mounted in the ego-vehicle will have vis-
ible road. But the ego-vehicle images cannot be used for
representing the road class, since they are quite homoge-
neous, non-road objects such as the car body will be salient
if we train a classifier on them (as our experimental results
will show, this holds true). For this reason, we collect a set
of non-homogeneous road images as well. Instead of col-
lecting and annotating images from scratch, we propose to
use a distant supervision approach, and take advantage of
large publicly available image databases [26, 34]. The spe-
cific data collection process is described in Section 4.1.
Train a saliency map generator from image labels Af-
ter we collect the road and non-road images, we train a clas-
sification CNN so that we can obtain a road saliency map.
For this task, we choose to leverage a CNN with global av-
erage pooling (GAP) [33] as a simple architecture for ob-
taining a saliency map. Let fk(x, y) denote the activation
of channel k in the spatial position (x, y) in the last feature
map of the CNN. Then, the score Sc for class c is defined as
Sc =
1
N
?
k
wck
?
x,y
fk(x, y)? ?? ?
Fk
=
1
N
?
x,y
?
k
wckfk(x, y)? ?? ?
Mc(x,y)
,
(1)
where N is the number of spatial positions, F k is the result
of global average pooling, and the class-specific weightswck
are learned during training. The term Mc(x, y) can then be
interpreted as the saliency for class c at the spatial location
(x, y) [33].
Obtain weak labels from the saliency and superpixels
In addition to the saliency map, we use superpixels to sup-
plement the road segmentation results. This process is il-
lustrated in Figure 2. We use a graph-based algorithm for
Superpixels
Saliency Saliency + Superpixels
Weak road segmentation
Figure 2. A weak road segmentation mask is obtained by mark-
ing superpixels with sufficient saliency overlap as belonging to the
road.
generating the superpixels [11]. The superpixel genera-
tion algorithm has a threshold parameter k, which decides
to which extent the image will be oversegmented (small
k) or undersegmented (large k). Examples of superpixels
can be seen in Figure 3. We adapt superpixels based on
the assumptions that the saliency map is blurred and not
sharp enough to be regarded as an accurate segmentation,
and that a large superpixel will cover the road because it
tends to have similar appearance (e.g, color and texture)
within an image. These assumptions lead us to the follow-
ing method for combining the saliency map and superpix-
els in order to obtain better road segmentation results. Let
P? = {(x, y) : M(x, y) > ?} denote the salient area given
a saliency threshold ? . Given a set of superpixels S, the
weak label y(i)weak at location i is defined as
y
(i)
weak =
{
road |si ? P? |/|P? | > ?
other otherwise
, ?si ? S , (2)
where ? is an overlap threshold. That is, for each super-
pixel, if the overlap with the salient area is greater than ?, it
is regarded as corresponding to a road area. As our experi-
ments will show, this simple strategy of combining saliency
and superpixels gives a larger performance gain compared
to just using the saliency map (see Section 4.2).
Train an FCN for road segmentation using weak labels
We train an FCN [6] from the weak labels, where our as-
sumption is that the FCN is able to eliminate the noise of
the segmentation results given by the weak labels, and is
able to result in a better segmentation mask than the origi-
nal training data. As our experimental results will show, our
assumption holds true (see Section 4.3).
4. Experiments
Dataset. We conduct experiments on Cityscapes [8],
which is an established dataset proposed for the task of
fine-grained general semantic segmentation for autonomous
Figure 3. Graph-based superpixels [11]. The threshold parameter
k decides how coarsely the image will be segmented by the super-
pixels.
Figure 4. Examples of saliency estimation difference when using
different resolution and/or training images. The best saliency is
gotten by training on general images with low resolution. When
training on general images with high resolution, cars become
salient. When trained from car centric images with low resolu-
tion, the car body becomes salient. This tendency is stronger when
trained with higher resolution. Note that the bottom black region
in the ground truth indicates the car body.
driving. We only use the road class for the evaluation
and report the mean intersection over union (mIOU) in a
pixel-wise manner, ignoring the void regions defined in the
ground truth. We train on 2, 975 training images defined
in Cityscapes, and test the performance on 500 validation
images, since ground truth for the test set is not available.
4.1. Saliency Map by Global Average Pooling
This section describes an experiment we conducted in
order to see the performance of the saliency map obtained
by global average pooling (GAP) [33], as well as how we
actually collected training images.
We require an image collection of road and non-road im-
ages for training a classification CNN with GAP. Instead
of annotating from scratch, we take advantage of two pub-
licly available large image databases: ImageNet [26] and
Places [34]. For road images, we use ImageNet for col-
lecting road images, as its labels are organized in an object
centric way. We searched for labels with the keyword road
or highway, which yielded the classes n02744323: arterial
road and n02744323: divided highway, dual carriageway.
Figure 5. Examples of road images from ImageNet used for train-
ing our saliency detector.
Figure 6. Examples of non-road images from Places used for train-
ing our saliency detector.
Random samples are shown in Figure 5.
We do not use the Cityscapes training set as road im-
ages, as the saliency FCN would highlight the objects that
consistently appear in the Cityscapes images. We prove this
empirically as a part of our experiments. For non-road im-
ages, we need to collect outdoor scene images without road.
We use Places, since unlike ImageNet, it organizes images
according to scenes. We first filter out scene labels whose
meta class corresponds to indoor scenes, which resulted in a
remaining 205 outdoor labels. We manually examined these
labels in order to exclude irrelevant classes (e.g., baseball
field) and road classes (e.g., field road), which resulted in
120 classes. Random samples are shown in Figure 6.
This is the only practically required manual labeling pro-
cess in our work. In addition, we do not aim to obtain very
accurate images corresponding to a label, as we do not have
time to check all the images manually, so some noisy im-
ages are acceptable. For example, the road class contains
images that do not look like a typical car centric road, as
they are shot from a helicopter (see the left side of Figure 5).
We train a VGG-based [29] architecture pretrained
for the ImageNet classification task[26], replacing fully-
connected layers with global average pooling [33]. We im-
plemented our models in Python using the Chainer frame-
work [30]. While the original method is trained on the res-
olution of 224 × 224 pixels, the images in Cityscapes have
Method mIOU
Low resolution, Generic road image 0.405
High resolution, Generic road image 0.092
Low resolution, Car centric road image 0.206
High resolution, Car centric road image 0.093
Table 1. Experimental results on Cityscapes when using saliency
only. Car centric images are from Cityscapes. General road im-
ages are from ImageNet.
a resolution of 2048 × 1024. Therefore, we tried two ap-
proaches:
• Train using 224 × 224 resolution, obtain a 14 × 14
saliency map (VGG downsamples the image by a fac-
tor of 16).
• Train using 896 × 448 resolution (higher is not possi-
ble due to GPU memory constraints), obtain a 56× 28
saliency map.
We then use bilinear interpolation on the saliency map to
restore the original Cityscapes resolution.
We evaluate the quality of the saliency map by compar-
ing it with the ground truth road segmentation mask. We set
the saliency threshold ? = 0.75, and compute mIOU for the
ground truth road in the Cityscapes training set (note that
the saliency generator was trained on ImageNet+Places; not
Cityscapes). The results are shown in Table 1. Perhaps sur-
prisingly, the lower resolution input yields a much better
mIOU of 0.405 compared to 0.092 for the higher resolu-
tion case. Our manual inspection of some random samples
indicated that the higher resolution saliency map tends to
highlight objects that often appear on the road, such as cars
or traffic signs. A sample image highlighting a car is shown
in top-right side of Figure 4. This makes sense because our
approach is data driven, but our findings suggest that we are
able to avoid this issue by using lower resolution images.
In order to prove our argument that we cannot directly
use Cityscapes images for road images, we trained a CNN
where we replaced road images with Cityscapes training
images. As shown in Table 1, the mIOU is lower compared
to just using road images. We also show examples in the
bottom row of Figure 4. The salient region is actually the
car body and the logo of the car company. This tendency is
stronger when the input resolution is higher, which is shown
in the bottom right side of the figure. This confirms our ar-
gument that we also need to collect general road images in
addition to the car centric road images.
4.2. Integration of Saliency and Superpixels
This section reports the results of generating road seg-
mentation masks by combining saliency map and superpix-
els. As we discussed in Section 3, three types of parameters
Superpixel
param. k
Saliency
thres. ?
Overlap
thres. ? mIOU
500 0.90 0.01 0.659
100 0.90 0.01 0.626
1000 0.90 0.01 0.600
100 0.75 0.25 0.565
500 0.75 0.25 0.505
100 0.50 0.50 0.491
500 0.50 0.50 0.471
1000 0.50 0.50 0.441
1000 0.75 0.25 0.425
100 0.90 0.10 0.414
500 0.90 0.10 0.358
1000 0.90 0.10 0.282
Table 2. Experimental results on Cityscapes of tuning our
method’s threshold parameters.
Trained from mIOU estim. labelingcost (hours)
Weak labels (WL) (iter. 0.) 0.779 0.6
Predictions (iter. 1.) 0.790 0.6
Predictions (iter. 2.) 0.798 0.6
Predictions (iter. 3.) 0.800 0.6
Predictions (iter. 4.) 0.799 0.6
WL + 60% of ground truth 0.855 39.7
WL + ground truth 0.863 65.9
Ground truth (baseline) 0.853 65.3
Table 3. Experimental results on Cityscapes when training an FCN
on our generated weak labels. Iter. k is trained from the prediction
of iter k ? 1 , except iter. 0, which is trained from weak labels
have to be tuned: the superpixel granularity parameter k,
the saliency threshold ? , and the overlap threshold ?. For
superpixels, we tried k = 100 (expected finer segmenta-
tion), k = 500 (the default value suggested in the author’s
implementation), and k = 1000 (expected coarser segmen-
tation). The results are shown in Table 2.
Integrating saliency and superpixels is beneficial for
making better weak labels. We believe the reason is that the
road tends to have homogeneous appearance within an im-
age, resulting in a superpixel covering most of it. Moreover,
using a high saliency threshold and a low overlap threshold
gave the best results.
4.3. Training an FCN from Weak Labels
This section describes the road segmentation results ob-
tained by training an FCN on our generated weak labels.
We use SegNet [6] as our choice of FCN, but we note that
our method is not dependent on the FCN, so any FCN could
Figure 7. Error analysis.
be used. We first train SegNet on the segmentation results
gotten by saliency and superpixels. We evaluate our results
both in quantitative and qualitative manners, regarding the
model trained from the ground truth pixel-wise annotations
as a baseline. Moreover, we report results of several other
experiments that we conducted in order to understand what
will improve the performance. The results of the following
experiments are summarized in Table 3.
Quantitative Evaluation We evaluate the performance
using mIOU on the evaluation images. Training from the
weak segmentation resulted in an mIOU of 0.779, which is
91.3% of the fully supervised performance of 0.853. More-
over, we note that the mIOU for training images is 0.777,
which is much higher than the mIOU of 0.659 that was got-
ten from the initial weak segmentation results. This indi-
cates that training an FCN from weak and noisy labels is
effective for removing the outliers and/or noise, and that the
FCN is able to learn the common ingredients of the noisy
segmentation masks, which should be closer to the ground
truth.
Qualitative Evaluation We also perform qualitative eval-
uations by manually inspecting 100 random samples from
the evaluation images, and compared with the ground truth
and the segmentation result of the fully supervised model.
For each image, we identify the major reason of the per-
formance drop, and summarize into four types. The four
types are shown in Figure 7. The evaluation indicates that
sidewalks are hard to distinguish from the road for both our
approach and the fully supervised approach. This is reason-
able, because sidewalks have a very similar appearance to
road and require context in order to be distinguished. We
also noticed that our approach sometimes yields far more
undersegmented results compared to the fully supervised
method. This indicates the lower quality of our weak la-
bels, compared to the ground truth. Several examples are
shown in Figure 8.
Training on the predicted output We confirmed that
training on the weak segmentation mask improves the seg-
mentation performance. Therefore, training another FCN
using the output of the first FCN as training data might
improve the results. Implementing this idea results in an
mIOU of 0.790 on evaluation data, which confirms our hy-
pothesis. We train yet several more on the output of the
Figure 8. Sample results, comparing our method with the fully supervised approach and ground truth. Row 1 shows the case where
segmentation is relatively successful. In row 2, we selected a sample whose number of false positive pixels are the largest due to incorrectly
recognizing sidewalk as road. In row 3, we selected a sample whose number of false negative pixels are the largest. It has large under-
segmented area on the road. It also incorrectly recognized building/walls as road.
previous FCN, and achieve 0.80 mIOU. With this training
procedure, we are able to match 93.8% of the performance
of the fully supervised model.
Fine-tune with pixel-wise ground truth annotations
Assuming that it is difficult to reach the fully supervised
performance only with the image label annotations, a prac-
tical scenario is to use these for pretraining the FCN, and
fine-tune with the ground truth annotation. It would help
us to reduce the annotation cost if this requires a smaller
number of ground truth images in order to match the fully
supervised model. We gradually decrease the number of
ground truth images to 90%, 80%,. . . , 10% and confirm that
an mIOU of 0.855, which is almost tied with the fully super-
vised model, is reached when using 60% of the ground truth
labels for fine-tuning. This result suggests that we could ob-
tain better results than a fully supervised model when start-
ing with our model trained from weak labels, and then fine-
tuning using all of the ground truth pixel-wise annotations.
Implementing this idea resulted in an mIOU of 0.863. This
shows that we potentially can use our weak labels for low-
cost pretraining.
4.4. Annotation cost estimation
The fundamental motivation for our work is to reduce the
annotation cost. This section estimates the annotation time
for our method and the supervised baseline, and discusses
the trade-off between annotation time and performance.
The annotation cost for a segmentation mask is estimated
to be 79 seconds for an object in an image [7]. Approximat-
ing road in an image as an object, the annotation time for
the 2, 975 training images is 2, 975× 79 = 235, 025 sec. ?
65.3 hours. On the other hand, the annotation cost in our
proposed method is to select labels from ImageNet and
Places. For ImageNet, we just searched by the two key-
words and selected two labels. We estimate this takes only
a minute per label, as we did not carefully investigate the
search results. For Places, we manually checked 205 out-
door classes to see if it contains road. We only checked at
most 10 images from each class. If we assume that image-
level labeling takes one second per class [7], then our re-
quired annotation time is 10 seconds per label. Based on
these estimations, the annotation time to collect non-road
images is 60×2+10×205 = 2170 sec. ? 0.6 hours. From
this estimation, we can conclude that we are able to obtain
93.8% of the performance using less than 1% of the anno-
tation cost of the fully supervised model (see Table 3). We
do not consider the time for creating ImageNet and Places,
as we regard them as existing public resources and because
pre-training from these large databases is common practice
in the computer vision community. We also note that this
way of comparison has been used previously in the litera-
ture for weakly supervised segmentation, where the cost for
creating ImageNet is ignored [7].
5. Conclusion and Future Work
We presented an approach for distantly supervised road
segmentation using fully convolutional neural networks,
based on saliency and superpixels. Our experimental results
on Cityscapes showed that our method was able to achieve
93.8% of the performance of a fully supervised approach
using only image-level labels, while significantly reducing
the annotation cost.
In the future, we will focus on finding a way to match
the performance of the fully supervised model. Possible ap-
proaches for this could include improving the quality of the
saliency detector by e.g., making it operate at a higher res-
olution. Other promising directions include trying more so-
phisticated weakly supervised segmentation, such as incor-
porating conditional random fields [17]. Finally, leveraging
geometric context for adding road-specific priors could be
explored as well.
Acknowledgments We would like to thank the members
of Preferred Networks, Inc., particularly Richard Calland,
Zornitsa Kostadinova, Masaki Saito, and Daichi Suzuo for
insightful comments and discussions.
References
[1] J. Alvarez, T. Gevers, Y. LeCun, and A. Lopez. Road scene
segmentation from a single image. In ECCV, 2012. 3
[2] J. M. Alvarez, T. Gevers, and A. M. Lopez. 3d Scene Priors
for Road Detection. In CVPR, 2010. 3
[3] J. M. A?. Alvarez and A. M. Lopez. Road detection based on
illuminant invariance. IEEE Trans. ITS, 2011. 3
[4] S. Andrews, I. Tsochantaridis, and T. Hofmann. Support vec-
tor machines for multiple-instance learning. In NIPS, 2003.
2
[5] H. Badino, U. Franke, and R. Mester. Free space computa-
tion using stochastic occupancy grids and dynamic program-
ming. In ICCV workshop, 2007. 3
[6] V. Badrinarayanan, A. Kendall, and R. Cipolla. SegNet: A
Deep Convolutional Encoder-Decoder Architecture for Im-
age Segmentation. PAMI, 2017. 1, 2, 4, 6
[7] A. Bearman, O. Russakovsky, V. Ferrari, and L. Fei-Fei.
What’s the point: Semantic segmentation with point super-
vision. In ECCV, 2016. 1, 2, 7
[8] M. Cordts, M. Omran, S. Ramos, T. Rehfeld, M. Enzweiler,
R. Benenson, U. Franke, S. Roth, and B. Schiele. The
cityscapes dataset for semantic urban scene understanding.
In CVPR, 2016. 1, 2, 4
[9] T. Durand, T. Mordan, N. Thome, and M. Cord. WILDCAT
: Weakly Supervised Learning of Deep ConvNets for Image
Classification , Pointwise Localization and Segmentation. In
CVPR, 2017. 2, 3
[10] M. Everingham, S. A. Eslami, L. Van Gool, C. K. Williams,
J. Winn, and A. Zisserman. The pascal visual object classes
challenge: A retrospective. IJCV, 111(1):98–136, 2015. 2
[11] P. F. Felzenszwalb and D. P. Huttenlocher. Efficient graph-
based image segmentation. IJCV, 59(2):167–181, 2004. 4
[12] S. Ha?nisch, R. H. Evangelio, H. H. Tadjine, and M. Pa?tzold.
Free-Space Detection with Fish-Eye Cameras. In IV, 2017.
3
[13] G. Huang, Z. Liu, L. van der Maaten, and K. Q. Weinberger.
Densely connected convolutional networks. In CVPR, 2017.
2
[14] S. Je?gou, M. Drozdzal, D. Vazquez, A. Romero, and Y. Ben-
gio. The one hundred layers tiramisu: Fully convolutional
DenseNets for semantic segmentation. arXiv:1611.09326,
2016. 2
[15] B. Jin, M. V. O. Segovia, and S. Su?sstrunk. Webly Super-
vised Semantic Segmentation. In CVPR, 2017. 3
[16] A. Khoreva, R. Benenson, J. Hosang, M. Hein, and
B. Schiele. Simple Does It: Weakly Supervised Instance and
Semantic Segmentation. In CVPR, 2017. 2
[17] A. Kolesnikov and C. H. Lampert. Seed, Expand and Con-
strain: Three Principles for Weakly-Supervised Image Seg-
mentation. In ECCV, 2016. 2, 3, 8
[18] D. Lin, J. Dai, J. Jia, K. He, and J. Sun. ScribbleSup:
Scribble-Supervised Convolutional Networks for Semantic
Segmentation. In CVPR, 2016. 2
[19] G. Lin, A. Milan, C. Shen, and I. Reid. Refinenet: Multi-
path refinement networks with identity mappings for high-
resolution semantic segmentation. In CVPR, 2017. 1, 2
[20] J. Long, E. Shelhamer, and T. Darrell. Fully convolutional
networks for semantic segmentation. In CVPR, 2015. 2
[21] M. Mintz, S. Bills, R. Snow, and D. Jurafsky. Distant super-
vision for relation extraction without labeled data. In ACL-
IJCNLP, 2009. 2
[22] G. L. Oliveira, W. Burgard, and T. Brox. Efficient deep mod-
els for monocular road segmentation. In IROS, 2016. 3
[23] D. Pathak, P. Kra?henbu?hl, and T. Darrell. Constrained Con-
volutional Neural Networks for Weakly Supervised Segmen-
tation. In ICCV, 2015. 2
[24] P. O. Pinheiro and R. Collobert. From image-level to pixel-
level labeling with convolutional networks. In CVPR, 2015.
2
[25] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox. U-net: Convolu-
tional networks for biomedical image segmentation. In MIC-
CAI, 2015. 2
[26] O. Russakovsky, J. Deng, H. Su, J. Krause, S. Satheesh,
S. Ma, Z. Huang, A. Karpathy, A. Khosla, M. S. Bernstein,
A. C. Berg, and L. Fei-Fei. ImageNet Large Scale Visual
Recognition Challenge. IJCV, 115:211–252, 2015. 2, 3, 4, 5
[27] F. Saleh, M. S. A. Akbarian, M. Salzmann, L. Petersson,
S. Gould, and J. M. Alvarez. Built-in foreground/background
prior for weakly-supervised semantic segmentation. In
ECCV, 2016. 2
[28] W. Shimoda and K. Yanai. Distinct class-specific saliency
maps for weakly supervised semantic segmentation. In
ECCV, 2016. 2, 3
[29] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman. Very Deep Convolutional
Networks for Large-Scale Image Recognition. In ICLR,
2014. 5
[30] S. Tokui, K. Oono, S. Hido, and J. Clayton. Chainer: a
next-generation open source framework for deep learning.
In NIPS workshop, 2015. 5
[31] A. Wedel, H. Badino, C. Rabe, H. Loose, U. Franke, and
D. Cremers. B-spline modeling of road surfaces with an ap-
plication to free-space estimation. IEEE Trans. ITS, 2009.
3
[32] H. Zhao, J. Shi, X. Qi, X. Wang, and J. Jia. Pyramid Scene
Parsing Network. In CVPR, 2017. 1, 2
[33] B. Zhou, A. Khosla, A?. Lapedriza, A. Oliva, and A. Tor-
ralba. Learning Deep Features for Discriminative Localiza-
tion. CVPR, 2016. 2, 3, 4, 5
[34] B. Zhou, A. Lapedriza, A. Khosla, A. Oliva, and A. Torralba.
Places: A 10 million Image Database for Scene Recognition.
PAMI, 2017. 2, 3, 4
