The CARESSES EU-Japan project:
making assistive robots culturally competent?
Barbara Bruno1, Nak Young Chong2, Hiroko Kamide3, Sanjeev Kanoria4,
Jaeryoung Lee5, Yuto Lim2, Amit Kumar Pandey6, Chris Papadopoulos7,
Irena Papadopoulos8, Federico Pecora9, Alessandro Saffiotti9, and Antonio
Sgorbissa1
1University of Genova, Via Opera Pia 13, 16145 Genova, Italy
2Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, 1-1 Asahidai, Nomi,
Ishikawa 923-1292, Japan
3Nagoya University, Furocho, Chikusaku, Nagoya, Aichi 464-8601, Japan
4Advinia Health Care Limited LTD, Regents Park Road 314, London N3
2JX, United Kingdom
5Chubu University, 1200 Matsumoto-cho, Kasugai, Aichi 487-8501, Japan
6Softbank Robotics Europe SAS, Rue Colonel Pierre Avia 43, 75015 Paris,
France.
7University of Bedfordshire, Park Square, Luton LU1 3JU, United Kingdom
8Middlesex University Higher Education Corporation, The Burroughs,
Hendon, London NW4 4BT, United Kingdom
9O?rebro University, Fakultetsgatan 1, S-70182 O?rebro, Sweden
June 5, 2017
Abstract
The nursing literature shows that cultural competence is an important requirement
for effective healthcare. We claim that personal assistive robots should likewise be cul-
turally competent, that is, they should be aware of general cultural characteristics and
of the different forms they take in different individuals, and take these into account
while perceiving, reasoning, and acting. The CARESSES project is an Europe-Japan
collaborative effort that aims at designing, developing and evaluating culturally com-
petent assistive robots. These robots will be able to adapt the way they behave, speak
and interact to the cultural identity of the person they assist. This paper describes the
approach taken in the CARESSES project, its initial steps, and its future plans.
?Paper presented at: Ambient Assisted Living, Italian Forum. Genova, Italy, June 12–15, 2017.
1
ar
X
iv
:1
70
8.
06
27
6v
1 
 [
cs
.R
O
] 
 2
1 
A
ug
 2
01
7
1 Introduction
Designers of personal assistive robots are often faced with questions such as: “How should
the robot greet a person?”, “Should the robot avoid or encourage physical contact?”, “Is
there any area of the house that it should consider off-limits?”. Intuitively, the correct
answer to all those questions is “It depends”, and more precisely, it depends on the person’s
values, beliefs, customs and lifestyle. In one word, it depends on the person’s own cultural
identity.
The need for cultural competence in healthcare has been widely investigated in the
nursing literature [17]. The fields of Transcultural Nursing and Cultural Competence play
a crucial role in providing culturally appropriate nursing care, as the presence of dedicated
cultural competence international journals and worldwide associations reflects [8, 5].
In spite of its crucial importance, cultural competence has been almost totally neglected
by researchers and developers in the area of assistive robotics. Today it is technically
conceivable to build robots — possibly operating within a smart ICT environment [28] —
that reliably accomplish basic assistive services. However, state-of-the-art robots consider
only the problem of “what to do” in order to provide a service: they produce rigid recipes,
which are invariant with respect to the place, person and culture. We argue that reasoning
only about “what to do” is not sufficient and necessarily doomed to fail: if service robots
are to be accepted in the real world by real people, they must take into account the cultural
identity of the assisted person in deciding “how” to provide their services.
The CARESSES project1 is a joint EU-Japan effort that will design culturally aware
and culturally competent elder care robots — see the Fact Sheet in Figure 4 at the end of
this paper. These robots will be able to adapt how they behave and speak to the culture,
customs and manners of the person they assist. The CARESSES innovative approach will
translate into care robots that are designed to be sensitive to the culture-specific needs
and preferences of elderly clients, while offering them a safe, reliable and intuitive system,
specifically designed to support active and healthy ageing and reduce caregiver burden.
From a commercial perspective, the cultural customization enabled by CARESSES will be
crucial in overcoming the barriers to marketing robots across different countries.
The rest of this article describes the CARESSES project in some details. We start by
clarifying, in Section 2, the type of “cultural competence” that we address. Section 3 gives
an overview of the CARESSES approach. The following three sections present the devel-
opmental methodology, the technical solutions, and the evaluation strategies, respectively.
Finally, Section 7 discusses the project’s status and future plans, and Section 8 concludes.
2 Facets of cultural competence
Culture is a notoriously difficult term to define. In the CARESSES project, we have adopted
the following definitions [23] in order to make our discussion precise and to help us to identify
the key components of a culturally competent robot.
Culture. All human beings are cultural beings. Culture is the shared way of life of a
group of people that includes beliefs, values, ideas, language, communication, norms and
visibly expressed forms such as customs, art, music, clothing, food, and etiquette. Culture
influences individuals’ lifestyles, personal identity and their relationship with others both
within and outside their culture. Cultures are dynamic and ever changing as individuals are
influenced by, and influence their culture, by different degrees.
Cultural identity. The concept of identity refers to an image with which one associates
and projects oneself. Cultural identity is important for people’s sense of self and how they
1Culture-Aware Robots and Environmental Sensor Systems for Elderly Support, www.caressesrobot.org
2
relate to others. When a nation has a cultural identity it does not mean that it is uniform.
Identifying with a particular culture gives people feelings of belonging and security.
Cultural awareness. Cultural awareness is the degree of awareness we have about our
own cultural background and cultural identity. This helps us to understand the importance
of our cultural heritage and that of others, and makes us appreciate the dangers of ethno-
centricity. Cultural awareness is the first step to developing cultural competence and must
therefore be supplemented by cultural knowledge.
Cultural knowledge. Meaningful contact with people from different ethnic groups can
enhance knowledge around their health beliefs and behaviours as well as raise understanding
around the problems they face.
Cultural sensitivity. Cultural sensitivity entails the crucial development of appro-
priate interpersonal relationships. Relationships involve trust, acceptance, compassion and
respect as well as facilitation and negotiation.
Cultural competence. Cultural competence is the capacity to provide effective care
taking into consideration people’s cultural beliefs, behaviours and needs. It is the result
of knowledge and skills which we acquire during our personal and professional lives and
to which we are constantly adding. The achievement of cultural competence requires the
synthesis of previously gained awareness, knowledge and sensitivity, and its application in
the assessment of clients’ needs, clinical diagnosis and other caring skills.
An analysis of the literature on personal, social and assistive robots reveals that the issue
of culture competence has been largely under-addressed, and that a lot of work is still to be
done to pave the way to culturally competent robot.
Several studies support the hypothesis that people from different cultures not only (i)
have different preferences concerning how the robot should be and behave [9], but also (ii)
tend to prefer robots better complying with the social norms of their own culture [25], both
in the verbal [27, 1] and non-verbal behaviour [7, 14]. Despite these findings, little work
has been reported on how to build robots that can be easily adapted to a given cultural
identity. An interesting example is the framework for the learning and selection of culturally
appropriate greeting gestures and words proposed by Trovato et al [26]. This work, like all
the ones mentioned above, consider adaptation at a personal level, and follow a “bottom-up”
approach, i.e., they identify nations as clusters of people with similar cultural profiles. As
such, adaptation to a different culture is a demanding process which requires either a long
time, or a large corpus of data to begin with.
A “top-down” approach would be better suited for encoding cultural information ex-
pressed at national-level, and how such information influences preferences in the robot
behaviours. Among the most popular metrics for a top-down description of culture at
a national-level, Hofstede’s dimensions for the cultural categorization of countries are six
scales in which the relative positions of different countries are expressed as a score from
0 to 100 [13]. As an example, the dimension of Individualism examines whether a nation
has a preference for a loosely-knit social framework, in which individuals are expected to
take care of only themselves and their immediate families, or for a tightly-knit framework, in
which individuals can expect their relatives or members of a particular in-group to look after
them, a notion which Hofstede called Collectivism. Hofstede’s dimensions have been used in
the field of assistive robotics to express the influence of culture on the gestures and words
that a robot should use at a first meeting with a person [18], or to decide certain motion
parameters like the approach distance depending on the cultural profile of the person [3].
3
Figure 1: The CARESSES concept of a culturally competent robot.
3 The CARESSES approach
The CARESSES approach to design culturally competent robots combines the above top-
down and bottom-up approaches. When a robot interacts with a person for the first time,
it uses a top-down approach to bootstrap its behavior using a cultural identity based on his
or her cultural group; over the course of time, the robot then uses a bottom-up approach to
refine this cultural identity based on the individual preferences expressed by that person.
Figure 1 illustrates this concept. For CARESSES, a culturally competent robot: (i)
knows general cultural characteristics, intuitively, characteristics that are shared by a group
of people; (ii) is aware that general characteristics take different forms in different individu-
als, thus avoiding stereotypes; and (iii) is sensitive to cultural differences while perceiving,
reasoning, and acting.
More concretely, the culturally aware solutions developed in CARESSES will be used to
expand the capabilities of the Pepper robot, which is designed and marketed by Softbank
Robotics, a partner of the project. The new culturally aware capabilities will include:
• communicating through speech and gestures;
• moving independently;
• assisting the person in performing everyday tasks, e.g., helping with to-do lists and
keeping track of bills, suggesting menu plans;
• providing health-related assistance, e.g. reminding the person to take her medication;
• providing easy access to technology, e.g., internet, video calls, smart appliances for
home automation;
• providing entertainment, e.g., reading aloud, playing music and games.
One of the key questions asked in CARESSES is what added value does cultural com-
petence brings to an assistive robots. In order to precisely answer this questions, the CA-
RESSES culturally competent robots will be systematically evaluated at different test sites
in Europe and in Japan, namely: the Advinia Healthcare care homes (UK; project part-
ner); the HISUISUI care home (Japan); and the iHouse facility at JAIST (Japan; project
partner). These facilities play complementary roles in the evaluation: the Advinia and
HISUISUI care homes provide access to real end users, who will take part in the evaluation;
while the iHouse, a duplex apartment fully equipped with sensors and smart appliances for
home automation, will allow us to explore the integration of culturally competent robots in
smart environments.
4
Figure 2: The CARESSES international consortium. See the Fact Sheet in Figure 4 for a
list of partners and their short names.
The ambitious role of CARESSES require the close interaction of actor from different
areas and different sectors. Accordingly, the CARESSES consortium includes experts in
trans-cultural nursing, in robotics, in artificial intelligence, in human-robot interaction, and
in the evaluation of technologies for the elderly. These are complemented by end users,
and by a company with a long experience in developing and marketing assistive, social,
educational and entertainment robots. Figure 2 shows the competences and geographical
distribution of the partners in the CARESSES consortium.
Cooperation between the EU and Japan is key for the successful accomplishment of
the objectives of CARESSES. First, it offers the possibility to investigate the outcomes
of interest of CARESSES through a robust user-testing approach: the impact of cultural
competence in assistive robotics will be evaluated in very different cultural contexts in EU
and Japan. Second, it allows CARESSES to benefit from the complementary competences
and resources of EU and JP partners. Among the others, EU and JP Participants will pool
two extremely valuable resources for system integration and testing: (i) the universAAL
software platform for open distributed systems of systems [10]; and (ii) the iHouse facility at
JAIST. Finally, this cooperation is expected to foster Transcultural Studies in Japan. While
the study of Transcultural Nursing is supported by international journals and associations
in the EU [8], similar studies or associations do not yet exist in Japan. As the number of
foreign residents in Japan is significantly increasing, CARESSES will contribute to draw
the attention of health-care professionals and public decision-makers to the role of cultural
competence in health-care.
The project management structure has been designed to adequately address the pecu-
liarities of CARESSES, a joint EU-JP project whose research activities are performed in
the context of two coordinated projects funded by different agencies: the EU Commission,
and the Japanese Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications. The management of
CARESSES also benefits from the support of an Ethical Advisor, of an Exploitation, Dis-
semination, and IPR Board, and of an External Expert Advisory Board.
4 Development methodology
CARESSES follows a strongly user-driven methodology to develop relevant technological
solutions, where requirements and knowledge come from the end users and domain experts,
and validation is done on the end users.
The research in the areas of Transcultural Nursing and Culturally Competent Healthcare
5
Table 1: Introduction scenario: Mrs Christou, a 75 years old Greek Cypriot who migrated
to the UK when she was 20 years old.
Scenario Robot skills Cultural competence
ROBOT: Hello Mrs. Christou! Perception (Face recog-
nition)
The robot hugs Mrs. Christou Moving (Arms)
MRS CHRISTOU: Hello!
Mrs. Christou smiles and hugs the robot
ROBOT: Would you prefer me to call you
Kyria Maria?
Speaking (Asking for
yes/no confirmation)
[Cultural Knowledge: general (1)] The
Greek Cypriot culture is very similar
to that of Greece, in which hierarchy
should be respected and some inequal-
ities are to be expected and accepted.
MRS CHRISTOU: Yes, that’s how one calls
an older woman in Cyprus. What is your
name?
[Cultural Awareness (2)] Mrs. Chris-
tou values her culture and its customs.
She expects others to treat her older
age status with some respect: this is
why she likes that the robot calls her
Kyria Maria (Kyria is Greek for Mrs).
ROBOT: I don’t have a name yet. Would
you like to give me a name?
Speaking (Catching key
words and reacting)
The robot leans slightly forward Moving (Body posture)
KYRIA MARIA: I will call you Sofia after
my mother, God rest her soul.
[Cultural Awareness (3)] She names
the robot after her mother, a common
custom to name one’s children. She
shows her respect to the dead through
signs of her religiosity.
The robot asks for confirmation for the
name, infers that Sofia is the name of Kyria
Maria’s mother and asks for confirmation
Speaking (Catching key
words; asking for yes/no
confirmation)
ROBOT SOFIA: Thank you, I like the name.
I am honoured to be called after your mother.
The robot smiles and hugs Kyria Maria Moving (Arms)
constitutes the theoretical foundations of CARESSES, paving the way to the development
of culturally competent robots. The robot’s attitude towards users has been initially created
based on data available on the Hofstede’s dimensions [13], complemented with specific infor-
mation about the user’s cultural group. This has allowed making preliminary assumptions
about the expected behaviour of a cultural competent robot, described in terms of Cultural
Awareness, Cultural Knowledge and Cultural Sensitivity [23].
4.1 Initial scenarios
In order to arrive to a set of technical requirement, we have grounded the above concepts
in concrete examples. These are summarized in Tables 1, 2 and 3, that describe possi-
ble scenarios of interaction between a culturally competent assistive robot and an elderly
person. The scenarios have been written by experts in Transcultural Nursing and draw
inspiration from the rationale and actions of culturally competent caregivers. Each table
reports a pattern of sensorimotor and/or verbal interaction, the required robot skills, as well
as the cultural competence (in terms of cultural awareness, cultural knowledge and cultural
sensitivity) that may contribute to determine the robot’s behaviour.
Albeit short, these scenarios show that the following capabilities are key for a robot to
exhibit a culturally competent behaviour:
6
Table 2: Health-care scenario: Mrs Smith, a 75 year old English lady, a former school
teacher.
Scenario Robot skills Cultural competence
The robot Aristotle detects that Mrs. Smith
is in a bad mood and adopts a more cheerful
voice
Perception (Understand-
ing facial expressions)
ROBOT ARISTOTLE: How do you feel to-
day Dorothy?
MRS DOROTHY SMITH: I feel OK but it’s
time for my tablets. I have diabetes.
[Cultural Knowledge: general (4)] The
UK has a pragmatic orientation.
A: Do you take tablets for diabetes? Speaking (Catching key
words; asking for yes/no
confirmation)
[Cultural Knowledge: specific (5)] The
robot is matching what Mrs. Smith
says with pre-stored knowledge about
her health.
D: Yes.
A: Do you want me to remind you to take
them?
D: Yes! I take them three times a day: morn-
ing, midday and evening. But sometimes I
forget them.
A: OK. I will remind you! Please select your
schedule on my screen.
Planning (Reminder) [Cultural Knowledge: specific (6)] The
robot knows that Mrs. Smith, a former
school teacher, is already familiar with
using a tablet.
The robot leans forward. Mrs. Smith selects
morning, midday and evening on the screen
Moving (Body posture),
Multi-modal Interaction
(Using multiple input
modalities)
A: Is there anything I can do for you? Can I
get you some water for the tablets?
[Cultural Knowledge: specific (7)] The
robot is acquiring knowledge about
what it means to Mrs. Smith to have
diabetes.
D: Yes. That would be very nice Aristotle.
The robot goes to fetch a glass of water Planning (Retrieving an
object), Perception (Lo-
cating an object), Mov-
ing (Legs, hands)
• cultural knowledge representation, this refers to the capability of storing and reasoning
upon cultural knowledge, see for example the interaction between the robot Aristotle
and Mrs. Smith in Table 2, in which the robot first uses knowledge (6) about Mrs.
Smith ’s work experience to tune how to introduce a new interaction modality (its
tablet), and later acquires new knowledge about her habits and medical prescriptions
(7);
• culturally-sensitive planning and execution, this refers to the capability to produce
plans and adapt such plans depending on the cultural identity of the user. Cultural
sensitivity, in the interaction between the robot Yuko and Mrs. Yamada in Table 3,
allows the robot for planning to help Mrs. Yamada make a video call (10);
• culture-aware multi-modal human-robot interaction, this refers to the capability of
adapting the way of interacting (in terms of gestures, tone and volume of voice, etc.)
to the user’s cultural identity. Cultural sensitivity makes the robot avoid asking direct
questions to Mrs. Yamada (see Table 3) and perform the proper greeting gestures with
Mrs. Christou (see Table 1);
7
Table 3: Home and family scenario: Mrs Yamada, a 75 years old Japanese lady who per-
formed tea ceremony in Kobe for 40 years
Scenario Robot skills Cultural competence
ROBOT YUKO: It is possible to test the
video call with your family, if you like it.
Speaking (Avoiding di-
rect questions)
The robot checks for Mrs. Yamada’s reac-
tion. She smiles.
Perception (Understand-
ing facial expressions)
MRS NAOMI YAMADA: Really? My son
and daughter both live in Tokyo. My son
is always busy, but he visits me during hol-
idays. I miss my daughter so much. Her
husband is Korean so she often goes to Ko-
rea. I want to call my husband, but he’s now
giving a lecture at school.
[Cultural Knowledge: specific (8)]
Naomi provides her personal details
only when the robot brings up the
topic.
Y: I can make a video call to your daughter,
son or husband if you want.
Speaking (Catching key
words and reacting)
The robot checks for Mrs. Yamada’s reaction Perception (Understand-
ing facial expressions)
N: Maybe later. I don’t know how to do it.
Can you give me a manual on how to do it?
[Cultural Knowledge: general (9)]
Japan is one of the most uncertainty
avoiding countries on earth.
Y: Just tell me who you want to call, then I
can help you. You are welcome to try.
Planning (Video call) [Cultural Sensitivity (10)] Empower-
ing: the robot is sensitive of the fact
that Naomi is frightened by using un-
known technology, and encourages her.
N: Ok, let’s try. You will be my assistant!
• culture-aware human emotion and action recognition, this refers to the capability to
interpret sensor data acquired by the robot during the interaction in light of cultural
knowledge. As an example, in Table 2 the robot Aristotle correctly labels Mrs. Smith
facial expression as indicative of a bad mood, while in Table 3 the robot Yuko relies
on Mrs. Yamada’s facial expression to get feedback on its suggestion to make a video
call;
• cultural identity assessment, habits and preferences detection, this refers to the capa-
bility to adapt general cultural knowledge and acquire new knowledge to better fit the
individual profile of the user. As an example, in Table 1 the robot Sofia uses knowledge
about the Greek culture to guess how Mrs. Christou would like to be addressed (1),
and her answer to validate its hypothesis (2). In Table 2, the robot Aristotle learns
Mrs. Smith’s habits in dealing with her medical prescriptions (5), and in Table 3 the
robot Yuko brings up the topic of video calls (8) to learn about Mrs. Yamada’s family.
4.2 Elicitation of guidelines
To ground the assumptions made into observations in real-world scenarios, the robot’s cul-
tural competence is now undergoing a process of iterative refinement on the basis of the
cultural behavioural cues collected from video recorded encounters between older people
living in sheltered housing and their caregivers. Specifically, having identified and verified
the relevant verbal and non-verbal behavioural cues, a panel of experts shall then refine the
assumption made and update the prototype robot’s cultural competence. In doing this, a
great care should be paid to eliminate stereotypic notions [19].
This process will ultimately produce guidelines describing how culturally competent
robots are expected to behave in assistive scenarios. The knowledge acquired in all these
8
Figure 3: A coarse view of the CARESSES architecture.
steps, both through comprehensive literature reviews on the topics and video recorded en-
counters, shall be formalized using tools for knowledge representations, as the availability of
formal languages for knowledge representation constitutes the basis for the robot to exhibit
autonomous reasoning, planning and acting skills depending on such knowledge. Also, in
the perspective of a commercial exploitation, it will allow the development of robots that
are able to autonomously acquire information and update their own knowledge about the
cultural context in which they are operating and ultimately to re-configure their approach
towards the user.
5 Technical solutions
From a technological point of view, the first steps of CARESSES have been to: (i) identify
the basic technical capabilities required for cultural competence, and (ii) define a system ar-
chitecture that enables the integration of these capabilities into a fully autonomous assistive
robot, possibly embedded in a smart environment.
5.1 System architecture
Figure 3 shows the main modules of the CARESSES architecture: the Cultural Knowledge
Base, the Culturally-sensitive Planning & Execution, and the Culture-aware human-robot
interaction, which are briefly described in the next sub-sections.
All the components are being integrated in universAAL [10], a software platform for open
distributed systems of systems that resulted from a consolidation process conducted within
an EU Project. The universAAL platform allows the seamless integration of heterogeneous
components within an environmental network through the extensive exploitation of two base
concepts, that turn out to be very suited for integration of components developed by different
partners of a complex RTD project: (i) the usage of ontologies to define the services provided
by network nodes as well as the procedures and data formats to access such services; (ii)
the usage of three dedicated communication buses for topic-based communication among
network nodes, namely a Context Bus, a Service Bus, and a User Interface Bus.
A bridge between universAAL and ECHONET [21], the Japanese ECHONET standard
for home automation, is being designed. This will allow the robot to communicate with a
9
smart environment. In CARESSES, this will be provided by the iHouse, a Japanese-based
duplex apartment fully embedded with sensors and actuators for home automation.
5.2 Cultural Knowledge Base
Properly encoding guidelines for cultural competence in a framework for knowledge repre-
sentation requires to take into account both methodological and architectural aspects.
Methodological aspects include: (i) how to represent the relationship between quantita-
tive and qualitative knowledge about different cultural groups; (ii) how to avoid stereotypes
by allowing for differences among individuals, while using the information about their na-
tional culture as a hint about their cultural identity; (iii) how to automatically reason on
cultural knowledge for producing a culturally competent robotic behaviour, i.e., plans and
sensorimotor behaviours aligned with the user’s cultural identity; and (iv) how to update the
knowledge base as long as new cultural knowledge is acquired through user-robot interaction.
Architectural aspects include: (i) which languages and tools should be used for knowl-
edge representation, e.g., Description Logics [2], Bayesian networks [24], OWL probabilistic
extensions such as PR-OWL [16]; (ii) which languages and tools should be used for query-
ing the knowledge base: e.g., standard OWL functions, SPARQL;2 (iii) which reasoning
tools should be adopted, e.g., basic mechanisms such as subsumption or instance check-
ing, rule-based languages such as SWRL,3 Bayesian inference; and (iv) which Application
Programming Interfaces, data formats, and protocols should be used to allow the robot to
access the knowledge base.
CARESSES will consider the above aspects to produce a portfolio of different solutions
to be included in the general framework for Knowkedge Representation. It will also define
procedures for the knowledge base creation and updating. Indeed, Cultural Knowledge can
be: (i) defined and introduced in the system a priori by experts in Transcultural Nursing,
formal and informal caregivers; (ii) acquired at run-time through robot-user interaction.
Specifically, run-time knowledge acquisition raises the most important methodological and
technological issues, e.g., in terms of which questions should be posed to the user, how
answers should be interpreted, how the information retrieved should be used to pose sub-
sequent questions and to update the Knowledge Base itself. It also raises issues on how
general cultural information known a priori (e.g., at National level) impact on individual
characteristics, and how the information acquired during robot-user interaction (i.e., ob-
served through sensors or explicit communication) can be merged with the already available
knowledge in order to perform a more accurate cultural assessment.
Finally, Knowledge Representation raises ethics issues in data privacy and protection,
extremely relevant whenever the system stores sensitive information not only about the user,
but also his / her family (e.g., names, domicile).
5.3 Culturally-Sensitive Planning and Execution
Once cultural knowledge has been explicitly produced, the challenge is to make the robot
use this knowledge to modulate its own behaviour to match the cultural identity of the user.
Technically, this translates into the ability to: (i) form plans to achieve the robot’s goals
while being aware of, and sensitive to, the user’s culture; and (ii) execute the actions in these
plans in a way that is also culturally aware and sensitive. As an example, the three robots in
Tables 1, 2 and 3 may have the same goal to help preparing the lunch, but they may achieve
this goal using different plans. These plans may include different actions (e.g., Aristotle may
help Mrs Smith by ordering the food online, whereas Sofia listens to Mrs Christou chatting
2https://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-sparql-query/
3https://www.w3.org/Submission/SWRL/
10
about cooking), or different ways to perform an action (e.g., Yuko collaboratively prepares
the lunch with Mrs Yamada).
The field of Artificial Intelligence (AI) has a long tradition in developing techniques
for the automatic generation and execution of action plans that achieve given goals [11].
Cultural aspects can contextually influence the generation and execution of action plans in
three ways:
• Discourage the use of certain actions; for example, to avoid suggesting recipes to Mrs
Christou;
• Include additional preconditions or goals, which may result in the inclusion of new
actions; for example, with Mrs Yamada, the robot Yuko performs an inquiry action
before committing to one action plan or another;
• Induce a preference for some actions; for example, Yuko may encourage Mrs Yamada to
cook instead of ordering food online, because this better complies with Mrs Yamada’s
need to make physical activity.
To take these influences into account, state-of-the-art approaches to constraint-based
planning [20] have been considered. In addition to requirements in terms of causal pre-
conditions (e.g., the robot’s hand must be empty to grasp an object), spatial requirements
(e.g., the robot must be in front of the user in order to interact), and temporal constraints
(e.g., the tea must be served before it gets cold), constraint-based planning can also include
constraints that pertain to the human-robot relation, e.g., to encode the fact that the robot
should never clean a room where the user is standing: this extension of constraint-based
planning is particularly suited to generate plans that take into account cultural constraints
and, in general, “human-aware planning” [15].
5.4 Culture-aware Human-Robot Interaction
Once a proper course of actions (including both motion and speech) has been planned taking
into account the user’s cultural identity, actions must be executed and feedback must be
considered to monitor their execution. In this context, Human-Robot Interaction plays a
crucial role in enabling the robot with cultural competence. On the one hand, the way the
robot behaves and speaks can produce different impacts and subjective experiences on the
user; on the other hand, what the user says and does is the key for the robot to acquire new
knowledge about the user, and consequently refine and improve its cultural competence.
As a prerequisite, the robot shall be equipped with motor capabilities that are sophis-
ticated enough to allow it to exhibit its cultural competence through motions, gestures,
posture, speech; similarly, it is mandatory that the robot (and possibly the environment) is
equipped with sensors and devices for multimodal audio / video / haptic interaction that
allow providing feedback to the modules for planning, action execution and monitoring, as
well as perceiving the nuances of human behaviour in different cultures. Moreover, commu-
nication devices allowing for a simplified interaction may also be fundamental for frail older
adults.
The role played by robot-user verbal communication has been carefully considered, as it
is the primary way of interaction, possibly allowing to acquire new knowledge and update the
Cultural Knowledge Base. Due to the current limitation in natural language understanding,
semantic comprehension is limited to the recognition of relevant keywords, that the robot
will use to react accordingly, by asking a confirmation through a simple multiple choice
(e.g., yes/no) question. Additional touchscreen-based interfaces (either embedded on the
robot or carried by users, e.g., tablets and smartphones) are used to complement the verbal
interaction modality.
11
The robot’s perceptual capabilities include the ability to estimate human emotions (joy,
sadness, anger, surprise) and recognize human actions. As the robot operates in a smart
ICT environment, the usage of lightweight wearable sensors that do not interfere with daily
activities is explored (e.g., smartwatches or sewable sensors).
Lastly, the robot will be equipped with a module to detect and recognize daily activities,
i.e., combinations of primitive actions performed in different contexts and places of the house
(e.g., walking, cleaning, sitting on a sofa, etc.) [4]. As time progresses and the robot has
more and more interactions with the user, daily activities and manners (a subset of social
norms that regulate the actions performed by the user towards other humans, or even the
robot itself) may be assessed to determine the long-term habits of the human companion.
Verbal interaction, as well as the assessment of user’s, emotions, actions, daily activities,
manners, and habits, will ultimately provide an input to perform a cultural assessment of
the user, updating the knowledge that the robot has about the user’s cultural identity.
The aforementioned capabilities involve procedures to merge and interpret sensor data
acquired by the robot and by the smart ICT environment at the light of cultural knowledge
that is already stored in the system. Indeed, cultural knowledge can play a fundamental role
at all levels of perception, ranging from basic object recognition to the detecting of daily
activities, manners and habits. For instance, if the system is uncertain if a purple object in
the fridge is a slice of pig liver or an eggplant, cultural information about the alimentary
customs of the users (that maybe are vegetarians) could help to disambiguate.
6 Evaluation strategy
To the end of testing and evaluation with elderly participants, an ethically sensitive and
detailed protocol that describes the screening, recruitment, testing and analytical procedures
is being produced and scrutinised by relevant ethics committees. Once ethical approval is
obtained, testing will commence. Testing will involve older adults belonging to different
cultural groups, who possess sufficient cognitive competence to participate and who are
assessed as sufficiently unlikely to express aggression during the testing period. Nominated
key informal caregivers (e.g., close family members) shall also be recruited.
The impact of cultural competence will be quantitatively evaluated by dividing par-
ticipants in experimental and control arms, i.e., interacting with robots with and without
cultural customization, by using state-of-the-art quantitative tools to measure the impact
of healthcare interventions.
End-user evaluation will be aimed at evaluating the capability of culturally competent
systems to be more sensitive to the user’s needs, customs and lifestyle, thus impacting on
the quality of life of users and their caregivers, reducing caregiver burden, and improving the
system’s efficiency and effectiveness. The evaluation will take place at the Advinia Health
Care network of Residential and Nursing care homes (UK) as well as in the HISUISUI care
facility (Japan). The evaluation in the UK care homes will include at least ten clients who
primarily identify themselves with the white-English culture, ten who primarily identify
themselves with the Indian culture, and ten who primarily identify themselves with the
Japanese culture. Each group will be divided into an experimental and a control arm. Each
client will adopt a Pepper robot for a total of 18 hours over a period of two weeks. This
shall allow for enough time for a culturally customized Pepper robot to acquire knowledge
about the individual cultural characteristics of the assisted person and provide culturally
competent interactions and service, which will then be evaluated through quantitative tools
and qualitative interviews.
Quantitative outcomes of interest and measurement tools shall include (pre and post
testing):
12
• Client perception of the robot’s cultural competence. Measurement tool: Adapted
RCTSH Cultural Competence Assessment Tool (CCATool) [22] that shall measure
clients’ perceptions of the robot’s cultural awareness, cultural safety, cultural com-
petence and cultural incompetence, and shall include items associated with dignity,
privacy and acceptability.
• Client and informal caregiver health related quality of life. Measurement tool: Short
Form (36) Health Survey (SF-36) [12]. The SF-36v2 is a multi-purpose, short-form
health survey proven to be useful in surveys of general and specific populations, includ-
ing older adults. It measures: general health, bodily pain, emotional role limitation,
physical role limitation, mental health, vitality, physical functioning and social func-
tioning. Each dimension score has values between 0 and 100, in which 0 means dead
and 100 perfect health.
• Informal caregiver burden. Measurement tool: The Zarit Burden Inventory (ZBI) [29]
is a widely used 22-item self-report inventory that measures subjective care burden
among informal caregivers. Its validity and reliability has been widely established.
The scale items examine burden associated with functional/behavioural impairments
and care situations. Each item is scored on a 5-point Likert Scale, with higher scores
indicting higher care burden among informal caregivers.
• Client satisfaction with the robot. Measurement tool: Questionnaire for User Interface
Satisfaction (QUIS) [6]. This scale evaluates whether the clients are satisfied with the
interaction process including its efficiency and effectiveness. It will be adapted so that
“the software” is replaced by “the robot”.
Clients and their informal caregivers will also be invited to participate in qualitative
interviews to elicit discussion among their perceptions of the robot’s cultural competence,
quality of service provided, impact upon independence and autonomy. Discussions with
informal caregiver shall focus upon caregiver burden, impact on quality of life, and – very
importantly – experiences related to configuring the system by injecting cultural knowledge
before operations.
During evaluation, differences between the pre- and post-testing measures shall be con-
sidered. However, given that this is the first time that — to the best of our knowledge —
the above tools are proposed to be applied in a robotic context, there are no sufficiently
similar previous experimental outcome data to use to statistically power our trial in order
to sensitively detect clinically meaningful differences in pre- and post- outcome measures.
Therefore, we shall describe observed statistical differences in outcome measures within and
between arms, and report, using appropriate inferential tests, whether these differences are
statistically significant.
7 Current status and future work
The CARESSES project started on January 1, 2017. Its workplan span 37 months, im-
plementing the methodology discussed above. The starting technology includes Softbank’s
Pepper robot4 as well as the iHouse, a Japanese-based duplex apartment fully embedded
with sensors and actuators for home automation.5 Cultural competence will be achieved
through an investigation phase aimed at producing guidelines for Transcultural Robotic
4Pepper is produced by SoftBank Robotics Europe.
5The iHouse has been developed by the Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology.
13
Nursing6 as described in Section 4, and then through the development of three main tech-
nological components described in Section 5 above,7 and integrated in universAAL. Testing
and end-user evaluation will follow the procedure in Section 6.8
In the first months of the project, all partners of the consortium have closely cooper-
ated to define the initial specifications, produce scenarios of human-robot encounters, and
design the system’s architecture in all its details. A skeleton implementation of this ar-
chitecture, embedded in the universAAL framework, has been produced. The design and
implementation of the three main modules shown in Figure 3 has started.
The definition of scenarios is particularly important, as it will drive the investigation
of guidelines for cultural-competence in robotics, the technical development of the required
robotic capabilities (in terms of motion, perception, planning, knowledge representation,
etc.) as well as the design of experiments for testing and evaluation since the early stages of
the project. All partners of the consortium, led by Middlesex University, have cooperated for
the production of these scenarios using online tools for collaborative working (e.g., Google
Drive and the CARESSES gitLab repository). The close collaboration of domain experts
with the technical partners has been pivotal to the success of this stage, as it has been the
close collaboration between the EU and the Japanese partners.
The CARESSES project will now proceed through the following major milestones:
October 2017 The basic guidelines for the development of culturally competent robots are
ready to be used to start populating the cultural knowlegde base. On the technical side,
a fully integrated, albeit simplified version of the CARESSES system is implemented
and integrated in the universAAL application layer. This include a basic version of the
cultural knowledge base, of the culturally sensitive planning and execution module,
and of the culture-aware human robot interaction module. The latter includes the
main motion and perceptual capabilities required by Pepper in the scenarios. Each
component will subsequently be iteratively expanded, standalone debugged and tested,
and refined up to its final form.
October 2018 The detailed protocol that describes the screening, recruitment, and testing
procedures has been prepared and approved by Ethics Committee. On the technical
side, the culturally competent robot is ready for final integration, deployment testing
and evaluation. All the software modules have been properly integrated in universAAL
and standalone tested as they were developed, and can be properly configured to
produce the desired culturally competent behaviour. The full cultural knowledge base
has been populated with the guidelines for culturally competent robots.
August 2019 Tests in Health-Care Facilities and iHouse completed. Data and logs of
robot-user encounters have been collected. These include data from pre- and post-
testing structured interviews as well as Post-testing qualitative semi-structured inter-
views with clients and informal caregivers, ready to be analyzed.
The CARESSES project will end in December 2019. It will release its technical com-
ponents for culturally competent robots as Open Source, in a form suitable to be executed
in the application layer of universAAL. Most of the CARESSES deliverables are public and
they will be widely disseminated. The current status of the project its publications can be
accessed at the CARESSES web site www.caressesrobot.org.
6This investigation phase will be led by Middlesex University (UK) with the deep involvement of Nagoya
University (Japan).
7The development of these three components will be led, respectively, by University of Genova (Italy),
O?rebro University (Sweden), and Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, with the deep in-
volvement of SoftBank Robotics Europe (France) and Chubu University (Japan).
8End-user evaluation will be led by Bedfordshire University (UK), with the deep involvement of Nagoya
University.
14
8 Conclusions
Assistive robots can help foster the independence and autonomy of older persons in many
ways, by reducing the days spent in care institutions and prolonging time spent living in
their own home. Cultural competence allows assistive robots to be more acceptable by being
more sensitive to the user’s needs, customs and lifestyle. In this article, we have discussed
the notion of cultural competece that is put forward in the context of the CARESSES joint
EU-Japan project. We have provided an overview of the project, discussed the problems
that it has to address and its methodology, and presented its initial steps.
To the best of our knowledge, CARESSES is the first attempt to build culturally compe-
tent robots. We believe that cultural competence is a necessary, althought so far understud-
ied ingredient for any social, personal or assistive robot. In this respect, we are persuaded
that CARESSES is a ground breaking project. Even if CARESSES only produces a proto-
type that shall need to be further evaluated and refined before drawing definitive conclusions
about the impact of cultural competence in assistive robotics, we claim that our pilot will
be invaluable in paving the way for future similar studies.
Acknowledgements
The CARESSES project is supported by the European Commission Horizon2020 Research
and Innovation Programme under grant agreement No. 737858, and by the Ministry of
Internal Affairs and Communication of Japan.
References
[1] Sean Andrist, Micheline Ziadee, Halim Boukaram, Bilge Mutlu, and Majd Sakr. Effects
of culture on the credibility of robot speech: A comparison between english and arabic.
In HRI 2015, pages 157–164, 2015.
[2] Franz Baader. The description logic handbook: Theory, implementation and applica-
tions. Cambridge university press, 2003.
[3] Barbara Bruno, Fulvio Mastrogiovanni, Federico Pecora, Antonio Sgorbissa, and
Alessandro Saffiotti. A framework for culture-aware robots based on fuzzy logic. In
IEEE Int Conf on Fuzzy Systems, 2017. To appear.
[4] Barbara Bruno, Fulvio Mastrogiovanni, Alessandro Saffiotti, and Antonio Sgorbissa.
Using fuzzy logic to enhance classification of human motion primitives. In Int Conf on
Information Processing and Management of Uncertainty in Knowledge-Based Systems,
pages 596–605, 2014.
[5] Transcultural c.a.r.e. associates.
[6] J.P. Chin, V.A. Diehl, and K.L. Norman. Development of an instrument measuring
user satisfaction of the human-computer interface. In CHI 1988, pages 213–218, 1988.
[7] Ghadeer Eresha, Markus Ha?ring, Birgit Endrass, Elisabeth Andre?, and Mohammad
Obaid. Investigating the influence of culture on proxemic behaviors for humanoid
robots. In RO-MAN 2013, pages 430–435, 2013.
[8] European transcultural nursing association.
15
[9] Vanessa Evers, Heidy Maldonado, Talia Brodecki, and Pamela Hinds. Relational vs.
group self-construal: untangling the role of national culture in HRI. In HRI 2008, pages
255–262, 2008.
[10] E. Ferro, M. Girolami, D. Salvi, C. Mayer, J. Gorman, A. Grguric, R. Ram, R. Sadat,
K. M. Giannoutakis, and C. Stocklow. The universaal platform for aal (ambient assisted
living). J Intell Syst, 24(3):301–319, 2015.
[11] M. Ghallab, D.S. Nau, and P. Traverso. The actor’s view of automated planning and
acting: A position paper. Artif Intell, 208:1–17, 2014.
[12] R.D. Hays, C.D. Sherbourne, and R.M. Mazel. The rand 36-item health survey 1.0.
Health Econ, 2(3):217–27, 1993.
[13] Geert Hofstede, Gert Jan Hofstede, and Michael Minkov. Cultures and organizations:
Software of the mind, volume 2. Citeseer, 1991.
[14] Michiel P Joosse, Ronald W Poppe, Manja Lohse, and Vanessa Evers. Cultural dif-
ferences in how an engagement-seeking robot should approach a group of people. In
CABS 2014, pages 121–130, 2014.
[15] U. Ko?ckemann, F. Pecora, and L. Karlsson. Grandpa hates robots - interaction con-
straints for planning in inhabited environments. In AAAI 2014, pages 2293–2299, 2014.
[16] Kathryn Blackmond Laskey. Mebn: A language for first-order bayesian knowledge
bases. Artif Intell, 172(2-3):140–178, 2008.
[17] Mcfarland M.R. Leininger, M.M. Transcultural nursing: concepts, theories, research
and practice. 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 2002.
[18] Birgit Lugrin, Julian Frommel, and Elisabeth Andre?. Modeling and evaluating a
bayesian network of culture-dependent behaviors. In Culture Computing 2015, pages
33–40, 2015.
[19] Maxim Makatchev. Cross-cultural believability of robot characters. PhD thesis, Robotics
Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, January 2013.
[20] M. Mansouri and F. Pecora. A robot sets a table: a case for hybrid reasoning with
different types of knowledge. J Exp Theor Artif Int, 28(5):801–821, 2016.
[21] S. Matsumoto. Echonet: A home network standard. IEEE Pervasive Computing,
9(3):88–92, 2010.
[22] I. Papadopoulos, M. Tilki, and S. Lees. Promoting cultural competence in health care
through a research based intervention. J of Divers Health Soc Care, 1(2):107–115, 2004.
[23] Irena Papadopoulos. Transcultural health and social care: development of culturally
competent practitioners. Elsevier Health Sciences, 2006.
[24] Judea Pearl. Causality: Models, Reasoning and Inference. Cambridge University Press,
2000.
[25] Gabriele Trovato, Jaap RC Ham, Kenji Hashimoto, Hiroyuki Ishii, and Atsuo Takanishi.
Investigating the effect of relative cultural distance on the acceptance of robots. In ICSR
2016, pages 664–673, 2015.
16
[26] Gabriele Trovato, Massimiliano Zecca, Martin Do, O?mer Terlemez, Masuko Kuramochi,
Alexander Waibel, Tamim Asfour, and Atsuo Takanishi. A novel greeting selection
system for a culture-adaptive humanoid robot. Int J Adv Robot Syst, 12, 2015.
[27] Lin Wang, Pei-Luen Patrick Rau, Vanessa Evers, Benjamin Krisper Robinson, and
Pamela Hinds. When in rome: the role of culture & context in adherence to robot
recommendations. In HRI 2010, pages 359–366, 2010.
[28] K. Wongpatikaseree, M. Ikeda, M. Buranarach, T. Supnithi, A.O. Lim, and Y. Tan.
Activity recognition using context-aware infrastructure ontology in smart home domain.
In KICSS 2012, pages 50–57, 2012.
[29] S.H. Zarit, K.E. Reever, and Bach-Peterson J. The rand 36-item health survey 1.0.
Gerontologist, 20(6):649–55, 1980.
17
Figure 4: CARESSES Fact Sheet.
18
