Deep EndoVO: A Recurrent Convolutional Neural
Network (RCNN) based Visual Odometry Approach for
Endoscopic Capsule Robots
Mehmet Turana,d, Yasin Almalioglub, Helder Araujoc, Ender Konukoglud,
Metin Sittia
aPhysical Intelligence Department, Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Germany
bComputer Engineering Department, Bogazici Univesity, Turkey
cInstitute for Systems and Robotics, Universidade de Coimbra,Portugal
d Computer Vision Laboratory, Department of Information Technology and Electrical
Engineering, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
Abstract
Ingestible wireless capsule endoscopy is an emerging minimally invasive diag-
nostic technology for inspection of the GI tract and diagnosis of a wide range of
diseases and pathologies. Medical device companies and many research groups
have recently made substantial progresses in converting passive capsule endo-
scopes to active capsule robots, enabling more accurate, precise, and intuitive
detection of the location and size of the diseased areas. Since a reliable real time
pose estimation functionality is crucial for actively controlled endoscopic capsule
robots, in this study, we propose a monocular visual odometry (VO) method for
endoscopic capsule robot operations. Our method lies on the application of the
deep Recurrent Convolutional Neural Networks (RCNNs) for the visual odom-
etry task, where Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and Recurrent Neural
Networks (RNNs) are used for the feature extraction and inference of dynamics
across the frames, respectively. Detailed analyses and evaluations made on a
real pig stomach dataset proves that our system achieves high translational and
rotational accuracies for different types of endoscopic capsule robot trajectories.
Keywords: Endoscopic Capsule Robot, Visual Odometry, sequential deep
Email addresses: mturan@student.ethz.ch (Mehmet Turan),
yasin.almalioglu@boun.edu.tr (Yasin Almalioglu), helder@isr.uc.pt (Helder Araujo),
ender.konukoglu@vision.ee.ethz.ch (Ender Konukoglu), sitti@is.mpg.de (Metin Sitti)
Preprint submitted to Elsevier August 24, 2017
ar
X
iv
:1
70
8.
06
82
2v
1 
 [
cs
.C
V
] 
 2
2 
A
ug
 2
01
7
learning, RCNN, CNN, LSTM, localization
1. Introduction
Following the advances in material science in last decades, untethered pill-
size, swallowable capsule endoscopes with an on-board camera and wireless im-
age transmission device have been developed and used in hospitals for screen-
ing the gastrointestinal tract and diagnosing diseases such as the inflammatory
bowel disease, the ulcerative colitis and the colorectal cancer. Unlike standard
endoscopy, endoscopic capsule robots are non-invasive, painless and more ap-
propriate to be employed for long duration screening purposes. Moreover, they
can access difficult body parts that were not possible to reach before with stan-
dard endoscopy (e.g., small intestines). Such advantages make pill-size capsule
endoscopes a significant alternative screening method over standard endoscopy
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. However, current capsule endoscopes used in hospitals are passive
devices controlled by peristaltic motions of the inner organs. The control over
capsule’s position, orientation, and functions would give the doctor a more pre-
cise reachability of targeted body parts and more intuitive and correct diagnosis
opportunity [6, 7, 8, 9]. Therefore, several groups have recently proposed ac-
tive, remotely controllable robotic capsule endoscope prototypes equipped with
additional functionalities such as local drug delivery, biopsy and other medi-
cal functions [10, 2, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18]. However, an active motion
control needs feedback from a precise and reliable real time pose estimation
functionality. In last decade, several localization methods [4, 19, 20, 21, 22]
were proposed to calculate the 3D position and orientation of the endoscopic
capsule robot such as fluoroscopy [4], ultrasonic imaging [19, 20, 21, 22], positron
emission tomography (PET) [4, 22], magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) [4], ra-
dio transmitter based techniques and magnetic field based techniques [15]. The
common drawback of these localization methods is that they require extra sen-
sors and hardware design. Such extra sensors have their own deficiencies and
limitations if it comes to their application in small scale medical devices such as
2
Figure 1: Traditional visual odometry pipeline.
space limitations, cost aspects, design incompatibilities, biocompatibility issue
and the interference of sensors with activation system of the device.
As a solution of these issues, a trend of visual odometry methods have attracted
the attention for the localization of such small scale medical devices. A clas-
sic visual odometry pipeline typically consisting of camera calibration, feature
detection, feature matching, outliers rejection (e.g RANSAC), motion estima-
tion, scale estimation and global optimization (bundle adjustment) is depicted
in Fig. 1. Although some state-of-the-art algorithms based on this traditional
pipeline have been applied for the visual odometry task of the hand-held en-
doscopes in the past decades, their main deficiency is tracking failures in low
textured areas. In last years, deep learning (DL) techniques have been dominat-
ing many computer vision related tasks with some promising result, e.g object
detection, object recognition, classification problems etc. Contrary to these
high-level computer vision tasks, VO is mainly working on motion dynamics
and relations across sequence of images, which can be defined as a sequential
learning problem. With that motivation, we propose a novel monocular VO
algorithm based on deep Recurrent Convolutional Neural Networks (RCNNs).
Since it is designed in an end-to-end fashion, it does not need any module from
the classic VO pipeline to be integrated. The main contributions of our paper
are as follows:
• To the best of our knowledge, this is the first monocular VO approach
through deep learning techniques developed for the endoscopic capsule
robot and hand-held standard endoscope localization.
3
• Neither prior knowledge nor parameter tuning is needed to recover the
absolute trajectory scale contrary to monocular traditional VO approach.
• A novel RCNN architecture is introduced which can successfully model
sequential dependence and complex motion dynamics across endoscopic
video frames.
• A real pig stomach dataset and a synthetic human simulator dataset with
6-DoF ground truth pose labels and 3D scan are recorded, which we are
considering to publish for the sake of other researchers in that area.
The proposed method solves several issues faced by typical visual odometry
pipelines, e.g the need to establish a frame-to-frame feature correspondence, vi-
gnetting, motion blur, specularity or low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). We think
that DL based endoscopic VO approach is more suitable for such challenge ar-
eas since the operation environment (GI tract) has similar organ tissue patterns
among different patients which can be learned by a sophisticated machine learn-
ing approach easily. Even the dynamics of common artefacts such as vignetting,
motion blur and specularity across frame sequences could be learned and used
for a better pose estimation.
As the outline of this paper, Section 2 introduces the proposed RCNN based
localization method in detail. Section 3 presents our dataset and the experi-
mental setup. Section 4 shows our experimental results, we achieved for 6-DoF
localization of the endoscopic capsule robot. Section 5 gives future directions.
2. System Overview and Analysis
Our architecture makes use of inception modules for feature extraction and
RNN for sequential modelling of motion dynamics to regress the robot’s orien-
tation and position in real time (5.3 ms per frame). It takes two consecutive
endoscopic RGB Depth frames each with timestamp and regresses the 6-DoF
pose of the robot without need of any extra sensor. For the depth image cre-
ation from RGB input images, we used shape from shading (SfS) technique of
4
Figure 2: Experimental overview.
Tsai and Shah, which is based on the following assumptions [23]:
• The object surface is lambertian
• The light comes from a single point light source
• The surface has no self-shaded areas.
For more details of the Tsai-Shah SfS method, the reader is referred to the orig-
inal paper of the authors. In past couple of years, some powerful CNN archi-
tectures, such as GoogleNet[24], VGG16[25], ResNet50[26] have been developed
and evaluated for various high level computer vision tasks, e.g object detection,
object recognition and classification [24],[27],[28][29]. One major drawback of
CNN architectures is the fact that they only analyse just-in-moment informa-
tion, whereas VO is rather dependent on the correlative information across
frames. Unlike traditional feed-forward artificial neural networks, RCNN can
use its internal memory to process arbitrarily long sequences by its directed cy-
cles between the hidden units. Therefore, we think that RCNN architectures are
5
more suitable than CNN architectures for VO tasks (see Fig. 3). The proposed
deep EndoVO (endoscopic visual odometry) approach works as follows:
Algorithm 1 Deep EndoVO
1: Take two consecutive input RGB images.
2: Create the depth images from RGB images using Tsai-Shah SfS method.
3: Subtract mean RGB Depth value of the training set from the RGB Depth
images.
4: Stack the preprocessed RGB Depth frame pair to form a tensor.
5: Serve the tensor into the stack of inception modules to create the feature
vector.
6: Feed the feature representation into the RNN layers.
7: Estimate the 6-DoF relative pose.
The proposed DL network consists of three inception layers and two LSTM
layers concatenated sequentially. The inception layers, imitating visual cortex
of human beings, are basically extracting multi-level features; i.e, features of
different sizes such as small details, middle-size or larger features (see Fig. 5b.
The final inception layer passes the feature representation into the RNN mod-
ules (see Fig. 5a). RNNs are very suitable for modelling the dependencies
across image sequences and for creating a temporal motion model since it has
a memory of hidden states over time and has directed cycles among hidden
units, enabling the current hidden state to be a function of arbitrary sequences
of inputs (see Fig. 5a). Thus, using RNN, the pose estimation of the current
frame benefits from information encapsulated in previous frames [31]. Given a
set of inception features xk at time k, RNN updates at time step k, W denote
corresponding weight matrices of the hidden units, b the bias vector, and H an
element-wise hyperbolic tangent based activation function. Long Short-Term
Memory (LSTM) is more suitable than RNN to exploit longer trajectories since
it avoids the vanishing gradient problem of RNN resulting in a higher capac-
ity of learning long-term relations among the sequences by introducing memory
gates such as input, forget and output gates and hidden units of several blocks.
6
Figure 3: Architecture Block Diagram.
Figure 4: Architecture of the proposed RCNN based monocular VO system.
7
(a) Information flow through the hidden
units of the LSTM [30].
(b) Inception layer[24]
Figure 5: The structure of the LSTM and inception layers of the proposed model is shown.
The input gate controls the amount of new information flowing into the current
state, the forget gate adjusts the amount of existing information that remains
in the memory and the output gate decides which part of the information trig-
gers the activations. The folded LSTM and its unfolded version over time are
shown in Fig. 5a along with the internal structure of a LSTM memory cell. It
can be seen that unfolded LSTMs correspond to timestamps. Given the input
vector xk at time k, the output vector hk?1 and the cell state vector ck?1 of
the previous LSTM unit, the LSTM updates at time step k according to the
following equations, where ? is sigmoid non-linearity, tanh is hyperbolic tangent
non-linearity, W terms denote corresponding weight matrices, b terms denote
bias vectors, ik, fk, gk, ck and ok are input gate, forget gate, input modulation
gate, the cell state and output gate at time k, respectively [30]:
fk = ?(Wf · [xk, hk?1] + bf ) ik = ?(Wi · [xk, hk?1] + bi)
gk = tanh(Wg · [xk, hk?1] + bg) ck = fk  ck?1 + ik  gk
ok = ?(Wo|cdot[xk, hk?1] + bo) hk = ok  tanh(ck)
Although the LSTM is prone to vanishing gradient problem of RNN and
is capable to detect the long-term dependencies, its learning capacity can be
increased further by stacking multiple LSTM layers vertically. Thus, our deep
RNN consists of two LSTM layers with the output sequence of the first one form-
8
ing the input sequence of the second one each containing 1000 hidden units, as
illustrated in Fig. 4. The proposed system, which learns translational and rota-
tional motions simultaneously to regress the 6-DoF pose, is trained on Euclidean
loss using Adam optimization method with the following objective loss function:
loss(I) = ?x?? x?2 + ??q? ? q?2 (1)
where x is the translation vector and q is the rotation vector. The pseudo-code
to calculate the loss value is given in Algorithm 2. In our loss function, a balance
? must be kept between the orientation and translation loss values which are
highly coupled each other as they are learned from the same model weights.
Experimental results show that the optimal ? is given by the ratio between the
loss values of predicted positions and orientations at the end of training session
[29].
Algorithm 2 Pseudo code to calculate the loss over the network
1: procedure CalculateLoss
2: loss ? 0
3: for layer in layers do
4: for top, loss weight in layer.tops, layer.loss weights do
5: loss? loss+ loss weight× sum(top)
The back-propagation algorithm is used to calculate the gradients of RCNN
weights, which are passed to the Adam optimization method to compute adap-
tive learning rates for each parameter employing the first-order gradient-based
optimization of the stochastic objective function. In addition to saving expo-
nentially decaying average of past squared gradients, vt, Adam optimization
keeps exponentially decaying average of past gradients, mt that is similar to
momentum. The update equations are given as
(mt)i = ?1(mt?1)i + (1? ?1)(?L(Wt))i (2)
(vt)i = ?2(vt?1)i + (1? ?2)(?L(Wt))2i (3)
9
(Wt+1)i = (Wt)i ? ?
?
1? (?2)ti
1? (?1)ti
(mt)i?
(vt)i + ?
(4)
We used default values proposed by [32] for the parameters ?1, ?1 and ?: ?1 =
0.9, ?2 = 0.999 and ? = 10
?8.
3. Dataset
This section demonstrates the experimental setup of the proposed study,
introduces our magnetically actuated soft capsule endoscopes (MASCE) and
explains how the training and testing datasets were recorded.
3.1. Magnetically Actuated Soft Capsule Endoscopes (MASCE)
Our capsule prototype is a magnetically actuated soft capsule endoscope
(MASCE) designed for disease detection, drug delivery and biopsy operations
in the upper gastrointestinal tract. The prototype is composed of a RGB cam-
era, a permanent magnet, a fine-needle and a drug chamber (see Fig. 6a for
visual reference). The magnet exerts magnetic force and torque to the robot in
response to a controlled external magnetic field [18]. The magnetic torque and
forces are used to actuate the capsule robot and to release drug and deliver the
needle through the hole in the bottom of the capsule. Magnetic fields from the
electromagnets generate the magnetic force and torque on the magnet inside
MASCE so that the robot moves inside the workspace. Sixty-four three-axis
magnetic sensors are placed on the top, and nine electromagnets are placed in
the bottom [18].
3.2. Training dataset
We created two groups of training datasets. The first training dataset was
recorded on five different real pig stomachs (see Fig.2), whereby the second
dataset which was only used for training purposes, was captured using a non-
rigid open GI tract model EGD (esophagus gastro duodenoscopy) surgical sim-
ulator LM-103 (see Fig.2). To ensure that our algorithm is not tuned to a
10
(a) Actuation system of the MASCE [18] (b) Exterior (left) and section view
(right) of MASCE [18]
Figure 6: MASCE design features and actuation unit
specific camera model, four different commercial endoscopic cameras were em-
ployed, specifications of which are shown in Table 1, accordingly. For each pig
stomach-camera combination, 2000 frames were acquired which makes for four
cameras and five pig stomachs 40000 frames, in total. Sample real pig stomach
frames are shown in Fig. 7a for visual reference. As a second training dataset,
for each of four cameras, we captured 10000 frames on an EGD human stomach
simulator making 40000 frames, in total. Sample synthetic training frames are
shown in Fig.7b for visual reference. During video recording, Optitrack motion
tracking system consisting of eight Prime-13 cameras and a tracking software
was utilized to obtain 6-DoF localization ground truth data in a sub-millimeter
precision (see Fig. 3) which was used as a gold standard for the evaluations of
the pose estimation accuracy.
3.3. Testing dataset
We created a testing dataset recorded using five different real pig stomachs,
which were not used for the training section. For each pig stomach-camera
combination, 2000 frames are acquired making 40000 frames, in total. We did
not capture any synthetic dataset for the testing session since it is less realis-
tic due to obvious patterns of such artificial simulators. For all of the video
records, again Optitrack motion tracking system was utilized to obtain 6-DoF
localization ground truth.
11
(a) Awaiba Naneye Endoscopic Camera
Resolution 250 x 250 pixel
Footprint 2.2 x 1.0 x 1.7 mm
Pixel size 3 x 3 µm2
Frame rate 44 fps
(b) Misumi-V3506-2ES camera
Resolution 400 x 400 pixel
Diameter 8.2mm
Pixel size 5.55 x 5.55 µm2
Frame rate 30 fps
(c) Misumi-V5506-2ES camera
Resolution 640 x 480 pixel
Diameter 8.6 mm
Pixel size 6.0 x 6.0 µm2
Frame rate 30 fps
(d) Potensic Mini Camera
Resolution 1280 x 720 pixel
Diameter 8.8 mm
Pixel size 10.0 x 10.0 µm2
Frame rate 30 fps
Table 1: Endoscopic camera specifications used for the experiments.
(a) Sample frames recorded on a real pig
stomach
(b) Sample frames recorded on EGD simu-
lator
Figure 7: Sample frames from the datasets used in the experiments.
4. Evaluations and Results
Architecture was trained using Caffe library and NVIDIA Tesla K40 GPU.
Using back-propagation-through-time method, the weights of hidden units were
trained for up to 200 epochs with an initial learning rate of 0.001. Overfitting
meaning that the noise or random fluctuations in the training data are picked
up and learned as concepts by the model, whereas these concepts do not apply
to a new data and negatively affect the ability of the model to make generaliza-
12
(a) Change in the loss values for a good
fitting
(b) Change in the loss values for overfitting
Figure 8: The decrease in the training and validation loss values. In overfitting case, the
training loss gets smaller than the validation loss. However, the loss values are balanced for a
good fit.
tions, was prevented using dropout and early stopping techniques (see Fig.11).
Dropout regularization technique introduced by [33] is an extremely effective
and simple method to avoid overfitting. It samples a part of the whole network
and updates its parameters based on the input data. Early stopping is another
widely used technique to prevent overfitting of a complex neural network ar-
chitecture which was optimized by a gradient-based method. The approach is
executed by splitting the dataset into a training and a validation set to evaluate
the generalization capability of the model.
For the testing sessions, only real pig stomach recordings were used to en-
sure real world conditions. Additionally, we strictly avoided to use any frame
from the training session for the testing session. Two separate experiments were
conducted, whereas training session of the first experiment was performed us-
ing only the synthetic training dataset (see Fig.7b) which we call simEndoVO
and training session of the second experiment was performed using frames from
both synthetic and real pig stomach dataset (see Fig. 7b and 7a) which we
call realEndoVO. The performance of the simEndoVO and realEndoVO ap-
proaches were analysed using averaged Root Mean Square Errors (RMSEs) for
translational and rotational motions. For various trajectories with different
complexity levels of motions, including uncomplicated paths with slow incre-
mental translations and rotations, comprehensive scans with many local loop
13
(a) Trajectory 1 (b) Trajectory 2
(c) Trajectory 3 (d) Trajectory 4
Figure 9: Sample ground truth trajectories and estimated trajectories predicted by the DL
based VO models. As seen, deep EndoVO is the closest to the ground truth trajectories. The
scale is calculated and maintained correctly by the models.
14
(a) Trajectory length vs translation error (b) Trajectory length vs totation error
Figure 10: Deep EndoVO outperforms both of the other models in terms of translational and
rotational position estimation.
closures and complex paths with sharp rotational and translational movements,
we performed testings on both simEndoVO and realEndoVO comparing them
with GoogLeNet and ResNet50 architectures which were modified to regress 6-
DoF pose values by removing softmax layer and integrating a fully-connected
(FC) layer and an affine regressor layer. The average translational and rota-
tional RMSEs for simEndoVO, realEndoVO, GoogLeNet and ResNet50 net-
works against different path lengths are shown in Fig. 10, respectively. The
results depicted indicate, that realEndoVO clearly outperforms GoogLeNet and
ResNet50, whereas simEndoVO slightly outperforms them. We presume that
the effective use of LSTM in EndoVO architecture enabled learning motion dy-
namics across frame sequences, which is not feasible by architectures working
with the principle of just-in-moment information processing; i.e GoogleNet and
ResNet50. The results in Fig.10 also indicate that the training procedure in-
cluding both simulator and real dataset was more informative than training
only with simulator dataset. On the other hand, the accuracies achieved by the
modified GoogLeNet are slightly better than accuracies achieved by the modi-
fied ResNet50, proving the superiority of inception layers over residual networks
for feature extraction related tasks. Derived from RMSEs calculated, the ro-
tational motion parameters seem to be more prone to overfitting compared to
15
(a) Training good fitting (b) Training overfitting
(c) Test good fitting (d) Test overfitting
Figure 11: The affect of good fitting and overfitting. The first and the second rows show
over-fitted and well-fitted models, respectively. As seen in subfigures, the model learns the
details and noise in the training data to an undesired extent that it negatively impacts the
performance of the model on the test data
translational motion parameters (see Fig.11 for visual reference). The reason
for that observation could be the fact that inner organ scanning procedures gen-
erally contain more translational motions than rotational motions resulting in a
better learning for translations. As the length of the trajectory increases, both
the translational and rotational error of all the proposed models significantly
decrease (see Fig.10). Some sample ground truth and estimated trajectories
for realEndoVO, GoogLeNet and ResNet50 are shown in Fig.9 for visual refer-
ence. As seen in these sample trajectories, realEndoVO is able to stay close to
16
the ground truth pose values for even sharp crispy motions, contrary to real-
EndoVO; GoogLeNet and ResNet50 path estimations which deviate drastically
from the ground truth path values. Even for very fast and challenge paths
such as 9a and 9c, the deviations of realEndoVO from the ground truth still
remain in an acceptable range for medical operations. In addition to that, it
is clearly seen that all of the three evaluated neural network architectures are
able to estimate the scale very accurately without using any prior information
or post alignment techniques contrary to traditional VO. Solving the scale am-
biguity for monocular camera based VO makes our proposed DL based method
more beneficial than traditional VO approach. As opposed to the traditional
VO pipeline (see Fig.1), the DL-based VO do not require any explicit feature
extraction, matching, outlier detection or multi-scale bundle adjustment-like
parameter tuning requiring operations, which can be seen as further benefits of
the proposed approach.
4.1. Comparisons of deep EndoVO with state-of-the-art SLAM methods
In this subsection, we compare the performance of the proposed deep En-
doVO with two of the widely used state-of-the-art SLAM methods; i.e. large-
scale direct monocular SLAM (LSD SLAM) [34] and the oriented fast and ro-
tated brief SLAM (ORB SLAM) [35]. LSD SLAM is a direct image alignment-
based method which optimizes the geometry using all of the image intensities. In
addition to higher accuracy and robustness particularly in environments with lit-
tle key points, this provides substantially more information about the geometry
of the environment, which can be very valuable for medical robot applications,
as well. ORB SLAM on the other hand, relies on feature point extraction and
tracking to estimate camera pose and 3D map the environment. Even though
it gives very promising results for feature-rich areas, its main deficiency appears
once the robot enters poorly featured areas. Tracking failures are commonly
observable for poorly featured GI tract tissues making ORB SLAM less proper
for our case. We believe that our deep EndoVO architectures makes an optimal
use of both direct and feature point information to estimate the pose. The av-
17
(a) Trajectory length vs translation error (b) Trajectory length vs rotation error
Figure 12: Deep EndoVO outperforms the state-of-the-art SLAM methods ORB SLAM and
LSD SLAM in both the translation and orientation estimation.
erage translational and rotational RMSEs for simEndoVO, realEndoVO, LSD
SLAM and ORB SLAM, shown in Fig. 12 indicate that both simEndoVO and
realEndoVO clearly outperforms LSD SLAM and ORB SLAM in terms of pose
accuracy. Sample trajectory estimations shown in Fig. 13 visualize clearly that
the tracking capability of the proposed deep EndoVO is much more robust and
reliable compared to LSD SLAM and ORB SLAM. In many parts of the trajec-
tories, ORB SLAM and LSD SLAM deviate from the ground truth trajectory
drastically, whereas deep EndoVO is still able to stay close to the ground truth
values even for most challenge trajectory sections (see Fig.13b,13c).
5. CONCLUSION
In this study, we presented, to the best of our knowledge, the first deep
VO method for endoscopic capsule robot and standard hand-held endoscope
operations. The proposed system is able to achieve simultaneous representa-
tion learning and sequential modelling of motion dynamics across frames by
concatenating the inception modules with RNN layers. Many issues faced by
traditional VO techniques such as feature correspondence establishment in low
textured areas, high reflections, motion blur and low image quality are handled
by the proposed deep EndoVO successfully. Since it is trained in an end-to-end
18
(a) Trajectory 1
(b) Trajectory 2
(c) Trajectory 3 (d) Trajectory 4
Figure 13: The ground truth and the trajectory plots acquired via deep EndoVO, LSD SLAM
and ORB SLAM. Deep EndoVO is the closest to the ground truth trajectories compared to
the state-of-the-art SLAM methods.
19
manner, there is no need to carefully fine-tune the parameters of the system. As
a future step, we consider to combine deep EndoVO with some functionalities
from the traditional VO pipelines such as RANSAC for outlier detection and
bundle fusion for globally consistent pose estimation etc to avoid drifts. More-
over, we consider to develop a stereo version of the proposed deep EndoVO
approach.
20
References
References
[1] Z. Liao, R. Gao, C. Xu, Z.-S. Li, Indications and detection, completion,
and retention rates of small-bowel capsule endoscopy: a systematic review,
Gastrointestinal endoscopy 71 (2) (2010) 280–286.
[2] T. Nakamura, A. Terano, Capsule endoscopy: past, present, and future,
Journal of gastroenterology 43 (2) (2008) 93–99.
[3] G. Pan, L. Wang, Swallowable wireless capsule endoscopy: progress and
technical challenges, Gastroenterology research and practice 2012.
[4] T. D. Than, G. Alici, H. Zhou, W. Li, A review of localization systems for
robotic endoscopic capsules, IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering
59 (9) (2012) 2387–2399.
[5] M. Sitti, H. Ceylan, W. Hu, J. Giltinan, M. Turan, S. Yim, E. Diller,
Biomedical applications of untethered mobile milli/microrobots, Proceed-
ings of the IEEE 103 (2) (2015) 205–224.
[6] M. Turan, Y. Almalioglu, H. Araujo, E. Konukoglu, M. Sitti, A non-rigid
map fusion-based rgb-depth slam method for endoscopic capsule robots,
arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.05444.
[7] M. Turan, Y. Almalioglu, E. Konukoglu, M. Sitti, A deep learning based 6
degree-of-freedom localization method for endoscopic capsule robots, arXiv
preprint arXiv:1705.05435.
[8] M. Turan, A. Abdullah, R. Jamiruddin, H. Araujo, E. Konukoglu, M. Sitti,
Six degree-of-freedom localization of endoscopic capsule robots using recur-
rent neural networks embedded into a convolutional neural network, arXiv
preprint arXiv:1705.06196.
21
[9] M. Turan, Y. Y. Pilavci, R. Jamiruddin, H. Araujo, E. Konukoglu, M. Sitti,
A fully dense and globally consistent 3d map reconstruction approach for
gi tract to enhance therapeutic relevance of the endoscopic capsule robot,
arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.06524.
[10] M. K. Goenka, S. Majumder, U. Goenka, Capsule endoscopy: Present sta-
tus and future expectation, World J Gastroenterol 20 (29) (2014) 10024–
10037.
[11] F. Munoz, G. Alici, W. Li, A review of drug delivery systems for capsule
endoscopy, Advanced drug delivery reviews 71 (2014) 77–85.
[12] F. Carpi, N. Kastelein, M. Talcott, C. Pappone, Magnetically controllable
gastrointestinal steering of video capsules, IEEE Transactions on Biomed-
ical Engineering 58 (2) (2011) 231–234.
[13] H. Keller, A. Juloski, H. Kawano, M. Bechtold, A. Kimura, H. Takizawa,
R. Kuth, Method for navigation and control of a magnetically guided
capsule endoscope in the human stomach, in: 2012 4th IEEE RAS &
EMBS International Conference on Biomedical Robotics and Biomecha-
tronics (BioRob), IEEE, 2012, pp. 859–865.
[14] A. W. Mahoney, S. E. Wright, J. J. Abbott, Managing the attractive mag-
netic force between an untethered magnetically actuated tool and a rotat-
ing permanent magnet, in: Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2013 IEEE
International Conference on, IEEE, 2013, pp. 5366–5371.
[15] S. Yim, E. Gultepe, D. H. Gracias, M. Sitti, Biopsy using a magnetic cap-
sule endoscope carrying, releasing, and retrieving untethered microgrippers,
IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering 61 (2) (2014) 513–521.
[16] A. J. Petruska, J. J. Abbott, An omnidirectional electromagnet for remote
manipulation, in: Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2013 IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on, IEEE, 2013, pp. 822–827.
22
[17] D. Son, S. Yim, M. Sitti, A 5-d localization method for a magnetically
manipulated untethered robot using a 2-d array of hall-effect sensors,
IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics 21 (2) (2016) 708–716.
[18] D. Son, M. D. Dogan, M. Sitti, Magnetically actuated soft capsule en-
doscope for fine-needle aspiration biopsy, in: Robotics and Automation
(ICRA), 2017 IEEE International Conference on, IEEE, 2017, pp. 1132–
1139.
[19] M. Fluckiger, B. J. Nelson, Ultrasound emitter localization in heteroge-
neous media, in: 2007 29th Annual International Conference of the IEEE
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, IEEE, 2007, pp. 2867–2870.
[20] J. M. Rubin, H. Xie, K. Kim, W. F. Weitzel, S. Y. Emelianov, S. R.
Aglyamov, T. W. Wakefield, A. G. Urquhart, M. ODonnell, Sonographic
elasticity imaging of acute and chronic deep venous thrombosis in humans,
Journal of Ultrasound in Medicine 25 (9) (2006) 1179–1186.
[21] K. Kim, L. A. Johnson, C. Jia, J. C. Joyce, S. Rangwalla, P. D. Higgins,
J. M. Rubin, Noninvasive ultrasound elasticity imaging (uei) of crohn’s
disease: animal model, Ultrasound in medicine & biology 34 (6) (2008)
902–912.
[22] S. Yim, M. Sitti, 3-d localization method for a magnetically actuated soft
capsule endoscope and its applications, IEEE Transactions on Robotics
29 (5) (2013) 1139–1151.
[23] T. Ping-Sing, M. Shah, Shape from shading using linear approximation,
Image and Vision Computing 12 (8) (1998) 487–498.
[24] C. Szegedy, W. Liu, Y. Jia, P. Sermanet, S. Reed, D. Anguelov, D. Erhan,
V. Vanhoucke, A. Rabinovich, Going deeper with convolutions, in: Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
nition, 2015, pp. 1–9.
23
[25] K. Simonyan, A. Zisserman, Very deep convolutional networks for large-
scale image recognition, CoRR abs/1409.1556.
[26] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, J. Sun, Deep residual learning for image recog-
nition, in: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, 2016, pp. 770–778.
[27] N. Su?nderhauf, S. Shirazi, F. Dayoub, B. Upcroft, M. Milford, On the
performance of convnet features for place recognition, in: Intelligent Robots
and Systems (IROS), 2015 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on, IEEE,
2015, pp. 4297–4304.
[28] O. Russakovsky, J. Deng, H. Su, J. Krause, S. Satheesh, S. Ma, Z. Huang,
A. Karpathy, A. Khosla, M. Bernstein, et al., Imagenet large scale visual
recognition challenge, International Journal of Computer Vision 115 (3)
(2015) 211–252.
[29] A. Kendall, M. Grimes, R. Cipolla, Posenet: A convolutional network for
real-time 6-dof camera relocalization, in: Proceedings of the IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Computer Vision, 2015, pp. 2938–2946.
[30] F. A. Gers, J. Schmidhuber, F. Cummins, Learning to forget: Continual
prediction with lstm.
[31] F. Walch, C. Hazirbas, L. Leal-Taixe?, T. Sattler, S. Hilsenbeck,
D. Cremers, Image-based localization with spatial lstms, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1611.07890.
[32] D. Kingma, J. Ba, Adam: A method for stochastic optimization, arXiv
preprint arXiv:1412.6980.
[33] N. Srivastava, G. E. Hinton, A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, R. Salakhutdinov,
Dropout: a simple way to prevent neural networks from overfitting., Journal
of machine learning research 15 (1) (2014) 1929–1958.
24
[34] J. Engel, T. Scho?ps, D. Cremers, Lsd-slam: Large-scale direct monocular
slam, in: European Conference on Computer Vision, Springer, 2014, pp.
834–849.
[35] R. Mur-Artal, J. Montiel, J. D. Tardo?s, Orb-slam: a versatile and accu-
rate monocular slam system, IEEE Transactions on Robotics 31 (5) (2015)
1147–1163.
25
