Exploiting Convolution Filter Patterns for Transfer Learning
Mehmet Aygu?n
Istanbul Technical University
Istanbul, Turkey
aygunme@itu.edu.tr
Yusuf Aytar
MIT
Cambridge, USA
yusuf@csail.mit.edu
Haz?m Kemal Ekenel
Istanbul Technical University
Istanbul, Turkey
ekenel@itu.edu.tr
Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a new regularization tech-
nique for transfer learning. The aim of the proposed ap-
proach is to capture statistical relationships among convo-
lution filters learned from a well-trained network and trans-
fer this knowledge to another network. Since convolution
filters of the prevalent deep Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) models share a number of similar patterns, in order
to speed up the learning procedure, we capture such cor-
relations by Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs) and trans-
fer them using a regularization term. We have conducted
extensive experiments on the CIFAR10, Places2, and CM-
Places datasets to assess generalizability, task transfer-
ability, and cross-model transferability of the proposed ap-
proach, respectively. The experimental results show that the
feature representations have efficiently been learned and
transferred through the proposed statistical regularization
scheme. Moreover, our method is an architecture indepen-
dent approach, which is applicable for a variety of CNN
architectures.
1. Introduction
The CNN models are found to be successful at var-
ious computer vision tasks such as image classification
[14, 27, 28], object detection [22], image segmentation [19,
21], and face recognition [20], where large-scale datasets
[24, 32, 20] are available. Nevertheless, the performance
of CNN models significantly reduces, when training data
is limited or the domain of the training set is far from the
test set. Today, the most successful and practical solution
to address lack of annotated large dataset is training the
networks on large-scale annotated datasets like ImageNet
[24] and Places [32], then finetuning these pre-trained net-
works for specific problems. Thanks to community, the pre-
trained models of well-known architectures like AlexNet
[18], VGG-16 [27], GoogLeNet [28], and ResNet [14] can
be found available online. However, when some architec-
tural changes are needed, these pre-trained networks can-
not be used. For such cases, it is necessary to train models
on large datasets, then, finetune for the particular problem.
Unfortunately, while getting nearly human performances on
a lot of applications with these models, training these net-
works on large datasets is still a significant problem and a
very time consuming process.
With recent advances in deep learning such as Resid-
ual Learning [14], successful networks have become more
and more deep, and training these models become harder in
terms of complexity and time. To find a solution for this
problem, inspired by What makes a good detector? [11],
we have investigated What makes a good CNN filter? Two
successful CNN models, AlexNet [18] and VGG-16 [27],
are analyzed from a statistical perspective, and we realized
that these models show similar patterns and redundancies.
In addition to our findings, in [7], authors show that 95%
of weights of neural networks could be predicted without
any reduction in accuracy. This leads us to the idea that we
can use these redundancies and patterns for learning better
representations quickly by transfer learning. Similar to the
methods used in [2, 4, 11], we introduce a regularization
term for transferring the statistical information to improve
the learning scheme. First, the statistical distribution of con-
volution filters from a well-trained network is learned with
a Gaussian Mixture Model. Next, the newly trained model
is encouraged to show similar statistics with source mod-
els using the regularization term. Extensive experiments on
the CIFAR10 [17], Places2 [32], and CMPlaces [4] datasets
show that the proposed approach is generalizable and the
networks can quickly learn a representation with statistical
regularization, which could efficiently be transferred to an-
other task and cross-domains. The overview of our pro-
posed method can be seen in Figure 1. The rest of the pa-
per is organized as follows: in Section 2 related works are
summarized, in Section 3 our detailed statistical analysis is
reviewed and the regularization term is introduced, in Sec-
tion 4 experimental results are presented and discussed, and
finally in Section 5 the paper is concluded.
ar
X
iv
:1
70
8.
06
97
3v
1 
 [
cs
.C
V
] 
 2
3 
A
ug
 2
01
7
Figure 1: Overview of the proposed system. The blue (top) network is a well-trained CNN where its distribution is learned
via GMM. When new red (bottom) network being trained, along with the classification loss, the new regularization term?
? · R(w) that measures the statistical difference of two distributions are minimized. The statistical knowledge could be
transferred from source CNN to target CNN with our regularization term. Best viewed in color.
2. Related Work
Network Distillation: The aim of network distillation
approaches are transforming larger networks to smaller
ones, while not losing so much information that was learned
in the large network. The pioneering work is conducted by
Bucila et al. [3], where their aim is to compress the ensem-
ble of models to a single model without significant accuracy
loss. Later, Hinton et al. [15] optimized the smaller net-
work to show similar softmax output of cumbersome model.
Then, Romero et al. [23] suggest that in addition to soft-
max outputs, intermediate representations could be used for
distilling the network. Recently distillation is also applied
in the cross-modal settings [13, 1]. The major drawback
of these methods is the necessity to train a large network
before using it to train a smaller one. Also these models
mainly match the outputs of the networks, whereas we reg-
ularize the internal weights of the network.
Domain Adaptation: Domain adaptation is the prob-
lem of learning a model that generalizes target domain ex-
amples besides source domain ones while learning only
from source domain. With the success of CNNs, domain
adaptation works have been focused on CNNs and sev-
eral successful methods have been proposed. For instance,
Ganin & Lempitsky [9] introduced gradient reversal layer
which act like identity transform in forward pass of CNN
and change the sign of the gradient and scale in the back-
ward pass. In their work, they added a domain classifier
to the end of the feature map and tried to predict the do-
main of examples. In backpropagation, they changed the
gradient using gradient reversal layer and forced the net-
works to learn domain invariant features by maximizing
loss of domain classifier. Tzeng et al. [29] added new terms
into objective function of CNN to both increasing domain
confusion and transferring inter-class knowledge. The first
term domain confusion loss forces the networks to learn do-
main invariant features and soft label loss forces the fea-
ture of the same class to be similar for both source and
target domain. In contradistinction to Ganin & Lempit-
sky [9], some target labels must be available for optimiz-
ing soft label loss. Moreover, recently some other works
[10, 12, 30, 26] focused on domain adaptation problems for
CNNs. While these methods focus on transferring informa-
tion about structure of data, our method focuses on transfer-
ring more local information.
Statistical Transfer: Statistical transfer is learning sta-
tistical properties from a source and to use this statisti-
cal knowledge for improving learning procedure. For in-
stance, Aytar & Zisserman [2] proposed part-level transfer
regularization which transfers parts of source detectors in-
stead of whole detector. Additionally, they take advantage
of part co-occurrence statistics. For example, if there are
wheels in the picture, probably another wheel would also
appear. They calculated these co-occurrence statistics using
the source data and transfer these statistics when a new ob-
ject detector is learned. Moreover, in the era of hand crafted
features, Gao et al. [11] analyzed famous HOG [6] tem-
plates of successful object detectors and made two obser-
vations. Firstly, they observed that activations of individual
cell models had some correlations, secondly local neigh-
borhoods of cells also showed the same characteristic. Fur-
thermore, since they wanted to transfer local information in
contrast to templates like in [2], they defined their priors
such that the correlations from the source model could be
transferred to target model without global template align-
ment. In a recent work [4], GMMs are used for aligning
cross-modal data. In this approach, statistics of activation
maps of different layers for a modality are learned, and the
other modalities are forced to show similar statistics in the
activations via a regularization term. The proposed method
is capable of aligning modalities by using this regularization
term when there is no strong alignment between modalities.
Our work is influenced by Gao et al. [11] and Castrejon
et al. [4]. The first work directs us to analyze the weights of
convolution filters and find the correlation between the fil-
ters, and the other one to use the GMM to enforce them to
show similar statistics in a non-convex optimization prob-
lem. Different from these works, our regularization forces
the weights to show similar statistics and transfers local cor-
relations of convolution filters.
3. Statistical Regularization
In this section, first, we present our analysis on CNN
models from a statistical perspective. Next, we describe our
approach for capturing statistical knowledge from a CNN
and present how to transfer this knowledge via a regulariza-
tion term.
3.1. Statistical Analysis
For investigating the statistical behavior of a CNN
model, we have used VGG-16 [27] and AlexNet [18] mod-
els that were trained on ImageNet [24] and Places-365 [32]
datasets. Especially, weights of convolution filters are an-
alyzed for the four models. We tried to answer following
three questions: (i) are filters separable into clusters?; (ii)
how much similar are the filters inside a cluster?; and (iii)
how all filters are distributed over clusters?. In order to ob-
tain this information, all 3 × 3 filters of a model are clus-
tered to ten different clusters using the k-means algorithm
and each cluster’s covariance matrix and mean value were
calculated and visualized. The covariance matrices would
provide information about how members of a cluster are
correlated. Mean values show whether the sets are similar
to each other or not. For instance, it can be seen in Figure 2
(a) the covariance matrices of all the four models show that
there is some shared behavior of learned filters across layers
and architectures. Also, the cluster centers depict different
similarities. Generally, all models have clusters that their
mean values are accumulated on the left, right, top, and bot-
tom. Moreover, when we look at the distribution of filters
to clusters, the models show different characteristics. While
the distributions are Gaussian-like in VGG-16 models, the
distributions cannot be fitted to a known distribution in the
AlexNet models and most of the clusters have roughly the
same number of filters. However, both AlexNet and VGG-
16 models show similar distributions by model wise while
they are trained on different dataset. The mean values are
shown in Figure 2 (b), and the distributions can be seen in
Figure 3.
3.2. The Proposed Method
Since our aim is capturing statistical properties of
“good” convolution filters and transfering this statistical
knowledge to another network, we modeled the convolu-
tion filters’ distributions and enforced the network to show
similar distributions. Similar to our work, [4] forces the
activations of networks to show similar distributions across
modalities for aligning cross modal data. In [4], the au-
thors used both mixture and single Gaussian distributions
for modelling activations, and the mixture models outper-
formed single Gaussian model in their problem. Since, our
aim is also similar to their work -capturing statistical knowl-
edge and transfering it- we have decided to use mixture
models for modeling distributions. The main difference is
that we force the weights of filters instead of the activations
to show similar distributions across the networks.
Let xn and yn be a training image and its corresponding
label. We want to minimize
min
w
?
n
L(z(xn, w), yn) (1)
where zn(xn ,w) is output of the network. We have added
a regularization term R to the loss term that represents the
negative log likelihood of a convolution filter to encourage
the network to learn the weights that are statistically simi-
lar to another network. For filter wi and distribution P we
define R such that,
R(wi) = ? log(P (wi)) (2)
The distribution P is modeled as GMM, therefore P would
be,
P (w|?, µ,?) =
K?
k=1
?kN (w|µk,?k) (3)
where K is the number of mixtures and
?
k ?k = 1 , ?k ?
0 ?k. Therefore, the total negative log likelihood for N
convolution filters can be defined as,
R(w|µ,?) =
N?
i=1
? log
K?
k=1
?kN (wi|µk,?k) (4)
where N is specified as,
N (w|µ,?) = 1
(2?|?|)?( 12 )
exp(?1
2
(w?µ)T ??1(w?µ))
(5)
The derivate of the negative log likelihood must be calcu-
lated exactly or analytically, since the network is trained
with back-propagation. Still, calculating exact derivative
in every iteration would be very expensive during training,
(a) (b)
Figure 2: (a) The covariance matrices of ten clusters that are calculated using the weights of convolution filters. The converged
VGG-16 and AlexNet models, which are trained on Places and ImageNet datasets, are used for clustering and visualizing.
(b) Visualizations of mean values of each clusters.
Figure 3: The distributions of the convolution filters over clusters. For both Places and ImageNet, the converged model of
VGG and AlexNet show similar distributions.
therefore, we approximately calculate the derivative. To
approximately calculate the derivative of a convolution fil-
ter, we first pick the mixture componentN (µs,?s) that the
probability of the convolution filter is maximized. Next, the
derivate is calculated using that single Gaussian. The partial
derivative ofR with respect to a convolution filter wi would
be
?R
?wi
= (wi ? µs)??1s (6)
Finally, our complete loss term is defined as
min
w
?
n
L(z(xn, w), yn)+
?
?
1
2
w2 +
?
? ·R(w) (7)
where the first and second terms are classification loss and
weight decay terms, and the last one is our regularization
term. The ? is a hyperparameter that controls the regulariza-
tion. For experiments in this paper, we have used distribu-
tion P , which is learned from convolution filters of VGG-16
model trained on ImageNet using Expectation maximiza-
tion (EM) algorithm with K = 1000 components. To re-
duce the number of parameters, we assumed that the co-
variances ?k are diagonal. Also, K-Means algorithm was
run on filters for decreasing the convergence time of EM al-
gorithm. While it is known that, different layers, especially
first layers, show different characteristics than other layers,
we have used a single GMM -P - for all filters. Because, if
multiple distributions are used, a layer alignment relation-
ship between layers are needed in transfer time.
4. Experiments and Results
Our hypothesis was that well-trained CNN models show
similar statistical patterns, and we could exploit this infor-
mation in the training phase. Our experiments show that
we can learn a better representation faster with the statisti-
cal regularization. For example, in section 4.1, we validate
that with regularization the convolution filters create more
general representations and show less overfitting character-
istics than regular trained filter’s representations. Also in
section 4.2, we see how the regularization helps to learn
representations that are successfully transferred to another
task. Furthermore, while transferring across task and do-
mains is widely studied, transfer learning for cross modal
data is not a well studied problem. We show that our method
(a) (b) (c) (d)
Figure 4: Difference between train and test losses of models in CIFAR-10. After freezing weights the models continued to
training. It can be easily seen that later freezing show less overfitting. In the (a),(b),(c), and (d) the regularization effect
is compared. With regularization models always overfit slowly (the difference increases slowly) than regular training. Best
viewed in color.
could be applied to cross-modal data as well. In section 4.3,
we present our experiments applied to a cross-modal dataset
CMPlaces [4].
4.1. Generalization
In this section, we evaluate if the statistical regulariza-
tion helps the generalizability of the learned representation.
For this purpose, we have used middle sized CIFAR-10
dataset [17] and CNN architecture described in [25]. Firstly,
we trained the network with and without regularization and
stopped the training at 10k, 15k, 20k, and 25k iterations.
Later on we freeze all 3 × 3 filters and continue learning
with training data. Since only the last layers change during
the training and the features extracted from convolution fil-
ters are not so generic, the validation loss starts to increase
and the validation accuracy is dropped.
We compared the networks, whose training stopped in
different iterations with and without regularization. In our
experiments, the training loss is started to oscillate in a
small interval and does not change much, that is, nei-
ther increases nor decreases. However, the validation loss
changed. The gap between training and test loss indicates
how generalizable the network is.
When we compared the models initialized at 10k, 15k,
20k, and 25k iterations, always the test loss of regular-
ized versions increased slowly compared to those of non-
regularized versions. For instance, as can be seen in Figure
4 (a,b,c,d), the difference between training and test loss in-
creases slowly in regularized models than non-regularized
models. Interestingly, as regular training time (no freezing)
increases, the gap between the regularized and normal train-
ing reduces.
4.2. Task Transfer
In this section, we show that the quickly learned repre-
sentations can also be transferred to another task more suc-
cessfully with regularization. To validate our claim, we try
to transfer filter distributions from ImageNet to Places2 [32]
dataset. The trivial solution for a classification problem is
training the network on ImageNet and finetuning the models
on the new task afterwards. We follow the same procedure
in this section for our experiments, but we want to finish
the pre-training stage as early as possible. Also we want
to show that our regularization can be used with finetuning.
To evaluate our method’s performance, we first train VGG-
F model introduced in [5] on ImageNet [24] data with and
without regularization. As in Section 4.1, we take snapshots
from 10k, 25k, and 50k iterations. Next, we start finetun-
ing on Places2 data [32]. When we compare regularization
effect, we see that the regularization can help to learn bet-
ter representations in the early iterations. For example, as
can be seen in Figure 5 (a), the performance of the mod-
els that are initialized at the weights learned in pre-training
with only 10k iterations, the regularized version shows a
better performance than the non-regularized one. When we
examine the models initialized at 25k iterations, the perfor-
mance difference between regularized and non-regularized
versions reduces. Finally, in 50k iterations, nearly there is
no difference in the performance. The test loss/iterations
plots are shown in Figure 5 (a), (b), (c). This experiment
shows that as pre-training time increases, the gain obtained
from regularization decreases. However, for limited amount
of pre-training time, the regularization could increase the
efficiency of the pre-training.
4.3. Modality Transfer
While CNNs performances are very good at various
computer vision tasks for real-world images, most of the
computer vision algorithms fail at non-real images. This
shows that generalization performance of the computer vi-
sion algorithms is not good for cross modal data. Some re-
cent works [4, 8] focused on this problem and recently Cas-
trejon et al. [4] has introduced a new Cross-Modal dataset.
In the dataset there are five different modalities for each
scene type such as natural image, sketch, clip art, spatial
text, and description. As in section 4.2, we firstly train
VGG-F models on a large dataset -Places2- and finetune
on CMPlaces data. We have used clipart and sketch data to
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 5: The pre-traiened VGG-F models are finetuned on Places2 dataset. Pretraining is stopped at 10k, 25k, and 50k
iterations. For (a) and (b) it can be easily seen that with regularization the test loss decreases quickly. Since test losses and
accuracies correlated we only provide test losses.
Pre-Training Top-5 Accuracy
25k 60.45
25k \w Reg. 62.25
50k 63.0
50k \w Reg. 64.5
Converged Imagenet 64.8
Table 1: The first column describes how pretraining is done
and the second column shows the top-5 accuracies after
finetuning for clipart data.
evaluate our performance, since we are interested in the vi-
sual domain. We take snapshots from 25k and 50k iterations
from the regularized and non-regularized networks. Next,
we start to finetune on sketch and clipart data and com-
pare their accuracies. Also, we finetune VGG-F model con-
verged on ImageNet data and compare with our pre-trained
models. Similar to our experiments, by rising the training
pre-training time the performance increases. Also, the regu-
larization helps to learn better representations and increases
the performance of pre-training for finetuning. Although,
there is a significant gap between the converged ImageNet
model and our regularization in the sketch data, there is
not a substantial difference between 50k iteration with reg-
ularization and the converged ImageNet model on clipart
modality. The results for both modalities can be seen in
Table 1 and Table 2. These results show that instead of
training ImageNet until the model converges, we could train
the models using regularization with only few iterations and
could employ these pre-trained networks for cross-modality
transfer.
4.4. Implementation Details
We have used Caffe [16] deep learning framework in
our experiments. Moreover, we have implemented our spe-
cial convolution layer for applying statistical regularization.
Pre-Training Top-5 Accuracy
25k 33.05
25k \w Reg. 40.75
50k 37.65
50k \w Reg. 41.1
Converged ImageNet 53.6
Table 2: The first column describes how pretraining is done
and the second column shows the top-5 accuracies after
finetuning for sketch data.
When VGG-F model is trained on ImageNet and Places
datasets, stochastic gradient descent with 0.01 learning rate
is used for optimization. In the CIFAR experiments, we
have used the same parameters described in [25]. Finally,
the Gaussian mixture models are learned using the VLFeat
library [31].
5. Conclusion
In this paper, we analyzed convolution filters of well-
known CNN architectures and found that they share a num-
ber of common patterns and redundancies that could be
exploited for transfer learning. Gaussian Mixture Models
are used for capturing these statistical patterns and a new
regularization term is introduced for transferring such pat-
terns to other networks. Our experiments show that we
could learn good representations that are transferable to the
other tasks and cross-domains quickly with regularization.
For instance, we achieved around 25% improvement on the
sketch modality in the cross-modal dataset under limited
pre-training time. Also, our method gets similar perfor-
mance on clipart data with converged model that pre-trained
on the ImageNet, while pre-training stopped at 50k itera-
tions in our method.
References
[1] Y. Aytar, C. Vondrick, and A. Torralba. Soundnet: Learning
sound representations from unlabeled video. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 892–900,
2016.
[2] Y. Aytar and A. Zisserman. Part level transfer regularization
for enhancing exemplar svms. volume 138, pages 114 – 123,
2015.
[3] C. Bucilu, R. Caruana, and A. Niculescu-Mizil. Model com-
pression. In Proceedings of the 12th ACM SIGKDD interna-
tional conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining,
pages 535–541. ACM, 2006.
[4] L. Castrejon, Y. Aytar, C. Vondrick, H. Pirsiavash, and
A. Torralba. Learning aligned cross-modal representations
from weakly aligned data. In Proceedings of the IEEE Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
2940–2949, 2016.
[5] K. Chatfield, K. Simonyan, A. Vedaldi, and A. Zisserman.
Return of the devil in the details: Delving deep into convo-
lutional nets. In British Machine Vision Conference, 2014.
[6] N. Dalal and B. Triggs. Histograms of oriented gradients for
human detection. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion, 2005. CVPR 2005. IEEE Computer Society Conference
on, volume 1, pages 886–893. IEEE, 2005.
[7] M. Denil, B. Shakibi, L. Dinh, N. de Freitas, et al. Predicting
parameters in deep learning. In Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems, pages 2148–2156, 2013.
[8] M. Eitz, K. Hildebrand, T. Boubekeur, and M. Alexa.
Sketch-based image retrieval: Benchmark and bag-of-
features descriptors. IEEE transactions on visualization and
computer graphics, 17(11):1624–1636, 2011.
[9] Y. Ganin and V. Lempitsky. Unsupervised domain adaptation
by backpropagation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.7495, 2014.
[10] Y. Ganin, E. Ustinova, H. Ajakan, P. Germain, H. Larochelle,
F. Laviolette, M. Marchand, and V. Lempitsky. Domain-
adversarial training of neural networks. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 17(59):1–35, 2016.
[11] T. Gao, M. Stark, and D. Koller. What makes a good
detector?–structured priors for learning from few examples.
Computer Vision–ECCV 2012, pages 354–367, 2012.
[12] M. Ghifary, W. B. Kleijn, M. Zhang, D. Balduzzi, and
W. Li. Deep reconstruction-classification networks for un-
supervised domain adaptation. In European Conference on
Computer Vision, pages 597–613. Springer, 2016.
[13] S. Gupta, J. Hoffman, and J. Malik. Cross modal distillation
for supervision transfer. In Proceedings of the IEEE Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
2827–2836, 2016.
[14] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun. Deep residual learn-
ing for image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
770–778, 2016.
[15] G. Hinton, O. Vinyals, and J. Dean. Distilling the knowledge
in a neural network. arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.02531, 2015.
[16] Y. Jia, E. Shelhamer, J. Donahue, S. Karayev, J. Long, R. Gir-
shick, S. Guadarrama, and T. Darrell. Caffe: Convolu-
tional architecture for fast feature embedding. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1408.5093, 2014.
[17] A. Krizhevsky and G. Hinton. Learning multiple layers of
features from tiny images. 2009.
[18] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton. Imagenet
classification with deep convolutional neural networks. In
Advances in neural information processing systems, pages
1097–1105, 2012.
[19] J. Long, E. Shelhamer, and T. Darrell. Fully convolutional
networks for semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion, pages 3431–3440, 2015.
[20] O. M. Parkhi, A. Vedaldi, and A. Zisserman. Deep face
recognition. In BMVC, volume 1, page 6, 2015.
[21] P. O. Pinheiro, R. Collobert, and P. Dollar. Learning to seg-
ment object candidates. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, pages 1990–1998, 2015.
[22] J. Redmon, S. Divvala, R. Girshick, and A. Farhadi. You
only look once: Unified, real-time object detection. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pages 779–788, 2016.
[23] A. Romero, N. Ballas, S. E. Kahou, A. Chassang, C. Gatta,
and Y. Bengio. Fitnets: Hints for thin deep nets. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1412.6550, 2014.
[24] O. Russakovsky, J. Deng, H. Su, J. Krause, S. Satheesh,
S. Ma, Z. Huang, A. Karpathy, A. Khosla, M. Bernstein,
et al. Imagenet large scale visual recognition challenge.
International Journal of Computer Vision, 115(3):211–252,
2015.
[25] T. Salimans and D. P. Kingma. Weight normalization: A
simple reparameterization to accelerate training of deep neu-
ral networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, pages 901–901, 2016.
[26] O. Sener, H. O. Song, A. Saxena, and S. Savarese. Un-
supervised transductive domain adaptation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1602.03534, 2016.
[27] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman. Very deep convolutional
networks for large-scale image recognition. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1409.1556, 2014.
[28] C. Szegedy, W. Liu, Y. Jia, P. Sermanet, S. Reed,
D. Anguelov, D. Erhan, V. Vanhoucke, and A. Rabinovich.
Going deeper with convolutions. In Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
pages 1–9, 2015.
[29] E. Tzeng, J. Hoffman, T. Darrell, and K. Saenko. Simultane-
ous deep transfer across domains and tasks. In Proceedings
of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision,
pages 4068–4076, 2015.
[30] E. Tzeng, J. Hoffman, K. Saenko, and T. Darrell. Ad-
versarial discriminative domain adaptation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1702.05464, 2017.
[31] A. Vedaldi and B. Fulkerson. Vlfeat: An open and portable
library of computer vision algorithms. In Proceedings of the
18th ACM international conference on Multimedia, pages
1469–1472. ACM, 2010.
[32] B. Zhou, A. Khosla, A. Lapedriza, A. Torralba, and A. Oliva.
Places: An image database for deep scene understanding.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.02055, 2016.
