Single Reference Image based Scene Relighting
via Material Guided Filtering
Xin Jina, Yannan Lia, Ningning Liuc, Xiaodong Lia,?,
Xianggang Jianga, Chaoen Xiaob, Shiming Ged,?
aDepartment of Computer Science and Technology,
bDepartment of Electronic Information Engineering,
Beijing Electronic Science and Technology Institute, Beijing, 100070, P.R. China
cSchool of Information Technology and Management,
University of International Business and Economics, Beijing, 100029, P.R. China
dInstitute of Information Engineering,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100093, P.R. China
Abstract
Image relighting is to change the illumination of an image to a target illumination effect
without known the original scene geometry, material information and illumination con-
dition. We propose a novel outdoor scene relighting method, which needs only a single
reference image and is based on material constrained layer decomposition. Firstly, the
material map is extracted from the input image. Then, the reference image is warped to
the input image through patch match based image warping. Lastly, the input image is
relit using material constrained layer decomposition. The experimental results reveal
that our method can produce similar illumination effect as that of the reference image
on the input image using only a single reference image.
Keywords: Image Relighting, Single Reference Image, Material Map, Layer
Decomposition
1. Introduction
Image relighting is a hot topic in the communities of computer vision, image pro-
cessing and computational photography. The applications of image relighting include
visual communication, film production and digital entertainment, etc. Image relighting
?Corresponding authors
Email addresses: lxd@besti.edu.cn (Xiaodong Li ), geshiming@iie.ac.cn (Shiming Ge )
Preprint submitted to Optics and Laser Technology August 24, 2017
ar
X
iv
:1
70
8.
07
06
6v
1 
 [
cs
.C
V
] 
 2
3 
A
ug
 2
01
7
is to change the illumination of an image to a target illumination effect without known
the original scene geometry, material information and illumination condition. Com-
paring with face, object and indoor scene, two main challenges are for outdoor scene
relighting: (1) large-scale outdoor scene with multiple objects, which are not easy to
reconstruct; (2) complex illumination in outdoor scene, which is hard to be controlled
manually. Recently, reference image based image relighting has shown great potential
[1] [2] [3] [4]. Currently, for face relighting, the reference images are changed from
multiple and a pair [5] to a single [3]. For object relighting [2] [6] and scene relighting
[1], multiple or a pair reference images are still needed [7] [8] [9] [10] [11].
We propose a novel outdoor scene relighting method, which needs only a single
reference image and is based on material constrained layer decomposition. Firstly, the
material map is extracted from the input image. Then, the reference image is warped to
the input image through patch match based image warping. Lastly, the input image is
relit using material constrained layer decomposition. The experimental results reveal
that our method can produce similar illumination effect as that of the reference image
on the input image using only a single reference image.
2. Scene Relighting
2.1. Method Overview
Our proposed method can be divided into 4 steps, as shown in Fig. 1 (1) the input
image is segmented to the material map using the method of Bell et al. [12]. Every pixel
of the material map is assigned by a material label; (2) the reference image is warped
to the structure of the input image by the patch match warping; (3) each channel of the
input image and the reference is decomposed to large-scale layer and detail layer under
material constrain; (4) the final relit results are obtained by composing the details of
the input image and the large-scale layer of the warped reference image.
2.2. Material Segmentation
The input image is segmented according to the material of each pixel. We use the
method of Bell et al. [12] to obtain material label of each pixel. We make the material
2
Input    Image
Material Map
Warped Reference 
Image
Large Scale Layer of 
Warped Ref.
Large-scale Layer
 of Input 
Relit ResultWLS
WLS
Comp.
Reference Image
Warp
Detail Layer of Input
Figure 1: Scene relighting using only a single reference image.
segmentation because that in different material region, different relighting operations
should be conducted. We select 9 sorts of materials, which often appear in outdoor
scene images, as shown in Fig. 2. We recolor each pixel according to the material label
to get the material map. The first and the third lines are the input images. The second
and the forth lines are the corresponding material maps.
2.3. Reference Image Warping
In face image relighting, the reference face image can be warped by face landmark
detection / face alignment. However, in outdoor scene, we cannot find such similar
structure easily. The outdoor scene contains multiple objects. Thus, we use the patch
match method to warp the reference image to the input image, i.e. to align the reference
and the input image. The patch match algorithm is similar as the method of Barnes et
al. [13]. We use the neighbor patches whose best matched patches have already been
found to improve matching result of current patch. The difference from Barnes et al.
[13] is that we use 4 neighbor patches instead of 3 ones.
The basic idea is to find the most similar patch in the reference image to substitute
the original patch in the input image. Two basic assumptions are made: (1) the matched
patches of the neighbor patches in the input image are mostly neighbor; (2) large scale
random search region may also contain matched patch.
3
b1
a1
b2
a2
b3
a3
b4
a4 a5
b5
a6
b6
cloud
sky
architecture
tree
light source
other
ground
water
grass
Figure 2: The material maps of the input images.
We denote the input image as A and the reference image as B. The coordinate of
a patch is represented as coordinate of the left up corner of the patch. The Nearest
Neighbor Field (NNF) is defined as f , whose definition domain is the coordinates of
all the patches in A. The value of the NNF is the offset of the coordinate of matched
patch in B. We denote the coordinate of the original patch in A as a and the coordinate
of the matched patch in B as b, then:
f(a) = b? a (1)
The distance between the original patch and the matched patch is defined as D(v),
which describes the distance between the patch a in A and patch a + v in B. The
distance is computed by the Euclidean distance [14]. The warping method contains
three steps: initialization, propagation and random search.
• Initialization. The initial offset of each patch in A is randomized around the
patch.
4
Input Image Ref. Image Warped Ref. Image
Figure 3: Patch match based scene image warping.
• Propagation. As assumed above, the matched patches of the neighbor patches
in the input image are mostly neighbor. We use the neighbor patches whose best
matched patches have already been found to improve matching result of current
patch. The f(x? 1, y), f(x, y ? 1) and f(x? 1, y ? 1) are used:
f(x, y) = min{D(f(x, y)),D(f(x? 1, y)),D(f(x, y ? 1)),D(f(x? 1, y ? 1))}
(2)
• Random Search. As assumed above, large scale random search region may
also contain matched patch. We use a search window whose size is declined
exponentially.
ui = v0 + w?
iRi, (3)
where v0 = f(x, y), Ri is a random point in [1, 1][?1, 1]. w is the max search
radius. ? is the declining rate of the radius.
The warped results of some reference images are shown in Fig. 3.
2.4. Layer Decomposition and Composition
We use the WLS filter [15] to decompose image into large-scale layer and detail
layer, which can be considered as the illumination component and non-illumination
5
component. Using the large-scale layer of the warped reference to substitute the large-
scale layer of the input can produce the final relit result. The outdoor scene contains
various objects with various materials. Thus for different material, different decompo-
sition parameters should be used. Each channel l of the input image and the reference
image is filtered to a large-scale layer s. The detail layer d is obtained by:
d = l/s. (4)
The original WLS filter uses the same smoothness level over the whole image.
When using the WLS filter for our scene relighting task, we need make regions with
different materials with different smooth levels. Thus, we set different smoothness
levels in regions with different materials. We modified the original WLS [15] as:
E = |l ? s|2 + ?H(?s,?l) (5)
H(?s,?l) =
?
p
(?(p)(
(?s/?x)2p
(?l/?x)?p + 
+
(?s/?y)2p
(?l/?y)?p + 
)), (6)
where, |l ? s|2 is the data term, which is to let l and s as similar as possible, i.e., to
minimize the distance between l and s. H(?s,?l) is the regularization (smoothness)
term, which makes s as smooth as possible, i.e. to minimize the partial derivative of
s. p is the pixel of the image. ? controls over the affinities by non-linearly scaling the
gradients. Increasing ? will result in sharper preserved edges. ? is the balance factor
between the data term and the smoothness term. Increasing ? will produce smoother
images.  is a very small number, so as to avoid the division by 0. Our ? is the
smoothness level constrained by different materials, using the material map derived in
Section 3.2:
? = ?l + gray(lm)/255, (7)
where,?l is the gradient of l. lm is the material map of l, and the gray is the gray value
6
Input Im
ages
(a)
(b) Ref. Image 
Relit Results 
(c)
(d)
W
arped Ref. 
Figure 4: The relit results of our method.
of lm:
gray = (R× 0.2989 +G× 0.587 +B × 0.114) (8)
The minimization of Eq. (1) and Eq. (2) can be solved by the off-the-shell methods
such as Lischinski [17]. At last, using the large-scale layer of the warped reference to
substitute the large-scale layer of the input can produce the final relit result.
3. Experimental Results
In this section, we show the experimental results of our proposed method and the
comparison with the state of the art method.
3.1. The Scene Relit Results
The relit results of our method are shown in Fig. 4. (a): multiple input images,
(b): the same reference image, (c): warped reference image, (d): relit results of input
images using (c), The experimental results reveal that, the relit input image have similar
illumination effect as that of the reference image.
3.2. Comparison with Other Methods
We compare our method with the state of the art method [1], which needs a time-
lapse video captured by a fixed camera working for 24 hours. While our method needs
7
Input Im
ages
Ref. Im
age
W
arped Ref. 
using O
ur 
M
ethod
Relit Results 
using O
ur 
M
ethod
W
arped Ref.
 using [1]
Relit 
Results 
using [1]
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 5: Comparison with [1].
only a single reference image. We randomly select 5 input images for comparison.
As shown in Fig. 5, (a): multiple input images, (b) the reference image, (c): warped
reference images to corresponding input images, (d): warped reference images using
method of [1], note that they need a time-lapse video for warping, (e): the relit results
using our proposed method, (f): the relit results using the method of [1].The results
reveal that our method can produce similar relit results as those of [1], with only a
single reference image.
4. Conclusions
We propose a novel outdoor scene relighting method, which needs only a single
reference image and is based on material constrained layer decomposition. The exper-
imental results reveal that our method can produce similar illumination effect as that of
the reference image on the input image using only a single reference image.
8
Acknowledgements
We thank all the reviewers and PCs. This work is partially supported by the Na-
tional Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant NO.61402021, 61401228, 61640216),
the Science and Technology Project of the State Archives Administrator (Grant NO.
2015-B-10), the open funding project of State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Tech-
nology and Systems, Beihang University (Grant NO. BUAA-VR-16KF-09), the Funda-
mental Research Funds for the Central Universities (Grant NO.2016LG03, 2016LG04),
the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (Grant NO.2015M581841), and the Post-
doctoral Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (Grant NO.1501019A).
References
[1] Y. Shih, S. Paris, F. Durand, W. T. Freeman, Data-driven hallucination of different
times of day from a single outdoor photo, ACM Trans. Graph. 32 (6) (2013)
200:1–200:11.
[2] T. Haber, C. Fuchs, P. Bekaert, H. Seidel, M. Goesele, H. P. A. Lensch, Relighting
objects from image collections, in: 2009 IEEE Computer Society Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR 2009), 20-25 June 2009,
Miami, Florida, USA, 2009, pp. 627–634.
[3] X. Chen, H. Wu, X. Jin, Q. Zhao, Face illumination manipulation using a single
reference image by adaptive layer decomposition, IEEE Trans. Image Processing
22 (11) (2013) 4249–4259.
[4] P. Peers, N. Tamura, W. Matusik, P. E. Debevec, Post-production facial perfor-
mance relighting using reflectance transfer, ACM Trans. Graph. 26 (3) (2007)
52.
[5] J. Chen, G. Su, J. He, S. Ben, Face image relighting using locally constrained
global optimization, in: Computer Vision - ECCV 2010, 11th European Con-
ference on Computer Vision, Heraklion, Crete, Greece, September 5-11, 2010,
Proceedings, Part IV, 2010, pp. 44–57.
9
[6] X. Jin, Y. Tian, N. Liu, C. Ye, J. Chi, X. Li, G. Zhao, Object image relighting
through patch match warping and color transfer, in: 2016 International Confer-
ence on Virtual Reality and Visualization (ICVRV), 2016, pp. 235–241.
[7] H. Lu, J. Guna, D. G. Dansereau, Introduction to the special section on artificial
intelligence and computer vision, Computers & Electrical Engineering 58 (2017)
444–446.
[8] H. Lu, Y. Li, S. Nakashima, H. Kim, S. Serikawa, Underwater image super-
resolution by descattering and fusion, IEEE Access 5 (2017) 670–679.
[9] H. Lu, Y. Li, L. Zhang, S. Serikawa, Contrast enhancement for images in turbid
water, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 32 (5) (2015) 886–893.
[10] H. Lu, Y. Li, S. Nakashima, S. Serikawa, Turbidity underwater image restoration
using spectral properties and light compensation, IEICE Transactions 99-D (1)
(2016) 219–227.
[11] Q. Zhou, B. Zheng, W. Zhu, L. J. Latecki, Multi-scale context for scene labeling
via flexible segmentation graph, Pattern Recognition 59 (2016) 312–324.
[12] S. Bell, P. Upchurch, N. Snavely, K. Bala, Material recognition in the wild with
the materials in context database, in: IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2015, Boston, MA, USA, June 7-12, 2015, 2015, pp.
3479–3487.
[13] C. Barnes, E. Shechtman, D. B. Goldman, A. Finkelstein, The generalized patch-
match correspondence algorithm, in: Computer Vision - ECCV 2010, 11th Euro-
pean Conference on Computer Vision, Heraklion, Crete, Greece, September 5-11,
2010, Proceedings, Part III, 2010, pp. 29–43.
[14] D. G. Lowe, Distinctive image features from scale-invariant keypoints, Interna-
tional Journal of Computer Vision 60 (2) (2004) 91–110.
[15] Z. Farbman, R. Fattal, D. Lischinski, R. Szeliski, Edge-preserving decomposi-
tions for multi-scale tone and detail manipulation, ACM Transactions on Graph-
ics (Proceedings of ACM SIGGRAPH 2008) 27 (3).
10
