NNVLP: A Neural Network-Based
Vietnamese Language Processing Toolkit
Thai-Hoang Pham
Alt Inc
Hanoi, Vietnam
phamthaihoang.hn@gmail.com
Xuan-Khoai Pham
FPT University
Hanoi, Vietnam
khoaipxmse0060@fpt.edu.vn
Tuan-Anh Nguyen
Alt Inc
Hanoi, Vietnam
ntanh.hus@gmail.com
Phuong Le-Hong
Vietnam National University
Hanoi, Vietnam
phuonglh@vnu.edu.vn
Abstract
This paper demonstrates neural network-
based toolkit namely NNVLP for es-
sential Vietnamese language processing
tasks including part-of-speech (POS) tag-
ging, chunking, Named Entity Recogni-
tion (NER). Our toolkit is a combination
of bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory
(Bi-LSTM), Convolutional Neural Net-
work (CNN), Conditional Random Field
(CRF), using pre-trained word embed-
dings as input, which achieves state-of-
the-art results these three tasks. We pro-
vide both API and web demo1 for this
toolkit.
1 Introduction
Vietnamese belongs to the top 20 most spo-
ken languages and is employed by an important
community all over the world. Therefore, research
on Vietnamese language processing is an essential
task. This paper focuses on three main tasks for
Vietnamese language processing including POS
tagging, chunking, and NER.
In this paper, we present a state-of-the-art sys-
tem namely NNVLP for the Vietnamese language
processing. NNVLP toolkit outperforms previ-
ously published toolkits on three tasks including
POS tagging, chunking, and NER. The contribu-
tions of this work consist of:
• We demonstrate a neural network-based
model reaching the state-of-the-art perfor-
mance for Vietnamese language processing
including POS tagging, chunking, and NER.
1nnvlp.org
Our model is a combination of Bi-LSTM,
CNN, and CRF models, which achieves an
accuracy of 91.30%, F1 scores of 84.11%
and 91.37% for POS tagging, chunking, and
NER tasks respectively.
• We provide our API and web demo for user,
which is believed to positively contributing
to the long-term advancement of Vietnamese
language processing.
The remainder of this paper is structured as fol-
lows. Section 2 summarizes related work on Viet-
namese language processing. Section 3 describes
NNVLP toolkit architecture, API, and web inter-
face. Section 4 gives experimental results and dis-
cussions. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper.
2 Related Works
Previously published systems for Vietnamese
language processing used traditional machine
learning methods such as Conditional Random
Field (CRF), Maximum Entropy Markov Model
(MEMM), and Support Vector Machine (SVM).
In particular, most of the toolkits for POS tagging
task attempted to use conventional models such as
CRF (Mai-Vu Tran, 2013) and MEMM (Le-Hong
et al., 2010). (Mai-Vu Tran, 2013) also used CRF
for chunking task. Recently, at the VLSP 2016
workshop for NER task, several participated sys-
tem use MEMM (Le-Hong, 2016), (Nguyen et al.,
2016) and CRF (Le et al., 2016) to solve this prob-
lem.
3 NNVLP API and Web Demo
3.1 System Architecture
We implement the deep neural network model
described in (Pham and Le-Hong, 2017). This
ar
X
iv
:1
70
8.
07
24
1v
2 
 [
cs
.C
L
] 
 2
8 
A
ug
 2
01
7
Figure 1: The CNN layer for extracting character-
level word features of word H?c_sinh (Student).
Figure 2: The Bi-LSTM-CRF layers for input sen-
tence Anh r?i EU hôm qua. (UK left EU yester-
day.)
model is a combination of Bi-directional Long
Short-Term Memory (Bi-LSTM), Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN), and Conditional Random
Field (CRF). In particular, this model takes as
input a sequence of the concatenation of word
embedding pre-trained by word2vec2 tool and
character-level word feature trained by CNN. That
sequence is then passed to a Bi-LSTM, and then
a CRF layer takes as input the output of the Bi-
LSTM to predict the best named entity output se-
quence. Figure 1 and Figure 2 describe the archi-
tectures of BI-LSTM-CRF layers, and CNN layer
respectively.
NNVLP toolkit uses these architectures for all
tasks including POS tagging, chunking, and NER.
Because each word in the Vietnamese language
2https://code.google.com/archive/p/
word2vec/
may consist of more than one syllables with spaces
in between, which could be regarded as multiple
words by the unsupervised models, we, first, seg-
ment the input texts into sequences of words by
pyvi toolkit3. These word sequences are put into
NNVLP toolkit to get corresponding POS tag se-
quences. Next, these word and POS tag sequences
are put into NNVLP toolkit to get corresponding
chunk sequences. Finally, NNVLP toolkit takes as
input sequences of the concatenation of word, POS
tag, and chunk to predict corresponding NER se-
quences. Figure 3 presents this pipeline of NNVLP
toolkit.
Figure 3: The Architecture of NNVLP Toolkit
3.2 NNVLP API
NNVLP API is an API for Vietnamese Lan-
guage Processing which takes input sentences and
outputs a JSON containing a list of sentences
where each word in these sentences has POS tag,
chunk, named entity attributes as shown in Fig-
ure 4.
Figure 4: The output JSON of the input sentence
"Ông Nam là gi?ng viên ??i h?c Bách Khoa." (Mr
Nam is a lecturer of Bach Khoa University.)
3https://pypi.python.org/pypi/pyvi
3.3 Web Demo
We also provide web interface4 for users of
NNVLP toolkit. Users can type or paste raw texts
into the textbox and click Submit button to get the
corressponding POS tag, chunk, named entity se-
quences. Each label is tagged with different color
to make the output easy to see. Users can also look
up the meaning of each label by click Help button.
Figure 5 presents the web interface of our system.
4 Experiments
In this section, we compare the performance
of NNVLP toolkit with other published toolkits
for Vietnamese including Vitk5, Vtools6, RDR-
POSTagger7, and vie-ner-lstm8.
4.1 Data Sets
To compare fairly, we train and evaluate these
systems on the VLSP corpora. In particular, we
conduct experiments on Viet Treebank corpus for
POS tagging and chunking tasks, and on VLSP
shared task 2016 corpus for NER task. All of these
corpora are converted to CoNLL format. The cor-
pus of POS tagging task consists of two columns
namely word, and POS tag. For chunking task,
there are three columns namely word, POS tag,
and chunk in the corpus. The corpus of NER
task consists of four columns. The order of these
columns are word, POS tag, chunk, and named en-
tity. While NER corpus has been separated into
training and testing parts, the POS tagging and
chunking data sets are not previously divided . For
this reason, we use 80% of these data sets as a
training set, and the remaining as a testing set. Be-
cause our system adopts early stopping method, we
use 10% of these data sets from the training set as
a development set when training NNVLP system.
Table 1 and Table 29 shows the statistics of each
corpus.
4.2 Evaluation Methods
We use the accuracy score that is the percent-
age of correct labels to evaluate the performance
of each system for POS tagging task. For chunking
4nnvlp.org
5https://github.com/phuonglh/vn.vitk
6https://github.com/lupanh/vTools
7http://rdrpostagger.sourceforge.net/
8https://github.com/pth1993/
vie-ner-lstm
9For more details about these tagsets, please visit the
demo website at nnvlp.org
Number of sentences
Data sets POS Chunk NER
Train 7268 7283 14861
Dev 1038 1040 2000
Test 2077 2081 2831
Table 1: The number of sentences for each part in
POS tagging, chunking, and NER data sets
Data sets Labels
POS N, V, CH, R, E, A, P, Np, M, C, Nc,
L, T, Ny, Nu, X, B, S, I, Y, Vy
Chunk NP, VP, PP, AP, QP, RP
NER PER, LOC, ORG, MISC
Table 2: Labels in POS tagging, chunking, and
NER data sets
and NER tasks, the performance is measured with
F1 score, where F1 = 2?P?RP+R . Precision (P ) is the
percentage of chunks or named entities found by
the learning system that are correct. Recall (R) is
the percentage of chunks or named entities present
in the corpus that are found by the system. A chunk
or named entity is correct only if it is an exact
match of the corresponding phrase in the data file.
4.3 Experiment Results
We evaluate performances of our system and
several published systems on POS tagging, chunk-
ing, and NER data sets. Inputs for POS tagging
task are words, for chunking task are words and
POS tags, and for NER task are words, POS tags,
and chunks. Table 3, Table 4, and Table 5 present
the performance of each system on POS tagging,
chunking, and NER task respectively.
System Accuracy
Vitk 88.41
Vtools 90.73
RDRPOSTagger 91.96
NNVLP 91.92
Table 3: Performace of each system on POS tag-
ging task
By combining Bi-directional Long Short-Term
Memory, Convolutional Neural Network, and
Conditional Random Field, our system outper-
forms all published systems on these three tasks. In
particular, NNVLP toolkit achieves an accuracy of
91.30%, F1 scores of 84.11% and 91.37% for POS
tagging, chunking, and NER tasks respectively.
Figure 5: The Web Interface of NNVLP Toolkit
System P R F1
Vtools 82.79 83.55 83.17
NNVLP 83.93 84.28 84.11
Table 4: Performace of each system on chunking
task
System P R F1
Vitk 88.36 89.20 88.78
vie-ner-lstm 91.09 93.03 92.05
NNVLP 92.76 93.07 92.91
Table 5: Performace of each system on NER task
5 Conclusion
We present a neural network-based toolkit for
Vietnamese language processing that is a combi-
nation of Bi-LSTM, CNN, and CRF. The system
takes raw sentences as input and outputs JSON
containing a list of sentences where each word in
these sentences has POS tag, chunk, named entity
attributes. The experimental results showed that
NNVLP toolkit achieves state-of-the-art results on
three tasks including POS tagging, chunking, and
NER.
References
Thanh Huong Le, Thi Thu Trang Nguyen, Trong Huy
Do, and Xuan Tung Nguyen. 2016. Named entity
recognition in Vietnamese text. In Proceedings of
The Fourth International Workshop on Vietnamese
Language and Speech Processing, Hanoi, Vietnam.
Phuong Le-Hong. 2016. Vietnamese named entity
recognition using token regular expressions and
bidirectional inference. In Proceedings of The
Fourth International Workshop on Vietnamese Lan-
guage and Speech Processing, Hanoi, Vietnam.
Phuong Le-Hong, Azim Roussanaly, Thi Minh Huyen
Nguyen, and Mathias Rossignol. 2010. An empiri-
cal study of maximum entropy approach for part-of-
speech tagging of Vietnamese texts. In Traitement
Automatique des Langues Naturelles-TALN 2010,
page 12.
Duc-Trong Le Mai-Vu Tran. 2013. vTools: Chunker
and part-of-speech tools. RIVF-VLSP 2013 Work-
shop.
Thi Cam Van Nguyen, Thai Son Pham, Thi Hong
Vuong, Ngoc Vu Nguyen, and Mai Vu Tran. 2016.
Dsktlab-ner: Nested named entity recognition in
Vietnamese text. In Proceedings of The Fourth In-
ternational Workshop on Vietnamese Language and
Speech Processing, Hanoi, Vietnam.
Thai-Hoang Pham and Phuong Le-Hong. 2017. End-
to-end recurrent neural network models for Viet-
namese named entity recognition: Word-level vs.
character-level. In Proceedings of The 15th Inter-
national Conference of the Pacific Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 251–264.
