Recent Advances in the Applications of Convolutional
Neural Networks to Medical Image Contour Detection
Zizhao Zhang1a, Fuyong Xinga, Hai Sua, Xiaoshuang Shia, Lin Yanga
aUniversity of Florida
Abstract
The fast growing deep learning technologies have become the main solution of
many machine learning problems for medical image analysis. Deep convolution
neural networks (CNNs), as one of the most important branch of the deep learning
family, have been widely investigated for various computer-aided diagnosis tasks
including long-term problems and continuously emerging new problems. Image
contour detection is a fundamental but challenging task that has been studied for
more than four decades. Recently, we have witnessed the significantly improved
performance of contour detection thanks to the development of CNNs. Beyond
purusing performance in existing natural image benchmarks, contour detection
plays a particularly important role in medical image analysis. Segmenting various
objects from radiology images or pathology images requires accurate detection of
contours. However, some problems, such as discontinuity and shape constraints,
are insufficiently studied in CNNs. It is necessary to clarify the challenges to en-
courage further exploration. The performance of CNN based contour detection
relies on the state-of-the-art CNN architectures. Careful investigation of their de-
sign principles and motivations is critical and beneficial to contour detection. In
this paper, we first review recent development of medical image contour detec-
tion and point out the current confronting challenges and problems. We discuss
the development of general CNNs and their applications in image contours (or
edges) detection. We compare those methods in detail, clarify their strengthens
and weaknesses. Then we review their recent applications in medical image anal-
ysis and point out limitations, with the goal to light some potential directions in
medical image analysis. We expect the paper to cover comprehensive technical
ingredients of advanced CNNs to enrich the study in the medical image domain.
1E-mail: zizhaozhang@ufl.edu
Preprint submitted to arXiv August 25, 2017
ar
X
iv
:1
70
8.
07
28
1v
1 
 [
cs
.C
V
] 
 2
4 
A
ug
 2
01
7
Keywords:
Medical image, Contour detection, Deep learning, Convolution neural networks
1. Introduction
Medical image analysis is the foundation of a computer-aided diagnosis (CAD)
system. The analysis of medical images with different modalities usually requires
accurate segmentation to isolate abnormal objects (cells or organs) to support ef-
ficient quantization. Contour detection is a fundamental prerequisite for medical
image segmentation, with the aim to detect the edges from images and further col-
lect the knowledge of the contours of objects. Accurate and fast contour detection
is a long-term study in this domain, which suffers from many difficulties. In re-
cent years, we have witnessed inspirational renovation in medical image analysis,
particularly image segmentation, due to the development of advanced machine
learning technologies.
Edge is the basic components of images. Detecting object edges and con-
tours is critical in many practical computer vision and medical image computing
tasks. The research in contour detection is a huge family comprised by a large
number of directions using various computer vision, image processing, and ma-
chine learning techniques [156]. Early contour detection methods are dominated
by unsupervised approaches, with the aim to estimate the local gradient changes.
In the past five years, supervised methods gradually dominate this area as a re-
sult of both accuracy and efficiency advantages. The main idea is to train a ma-
chine learning classifier to predict central pixel labels (edge or non-edge) of local
patches. Both directions require heavy hand-crafted features to accurately repre-
sent the local gradient information. Contour detection includes the detection of
edges but can simultaneously outline the continuous edges belong to object con-
tours. Therefore, contour detection is substantially more challenging than edge
detection since it models both low-level gradients and high-level object informa-
tion. Under conventional directions, the integration of low-level and high-level
cues is difficult, which often results in complex and computationally demanding
frameworks, including pre-processing, feature engineering, classifier training, and
post-processing. A fast and highly-integrated method that can accept raw images
and output contour maps is quite hypothetical, and the advantages of deep learning
give hopes to the demand.
There is world-wide recognition that deep learning has advanced the artificial
intelligence (AI) to the next generation [103, 61, 179]. The family of deep learn-
ing is comprised of a number of unsupervised and supervised learning models
2
[75, 107, 108, 62], such as Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM) [177, 149, 176]
and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs). CNN is a supervised model widely used
for image understanding. Compared with conventional machine learning mod-
els, such as support vector machines (SVM) [37], random forests [113]. CNN
has a deep layer-wise structure, making it proficient at learning hierarchical and
nonlinear representations to represent and discover complex and intricate high-
dimensional data structures to support discriminative classification. Therefore,
CNN is also a representation learning method [9].
In edge detection, there are multiple remarkable studies using standard CNNs
[186, 56, 12] have achieved marginal improvement over conventional methods.
However, the standard CNN suffers from the computationally bottleneck of their
patch-to-pixel dense prediction paradigm. The development of contour detec-
tion continuously takes benefits from the development of semantic segmentation
[151, 31, 70, 40, 117, 217, 159, 225, 138]. One of the most critical techniques
for dense prediction tasks is end-to-end CNN, proposed by [126, 185], which
performs pixel-wise prediction in a single feedforward. At present, end-to-end
training becomes the standard for most kinds of structured outputs, such as bound-
ing boxes [165, 57], shape [87], orientations [138], which offers much flexibility
to CNN beyond the form of image labels. The end-to-end training manner for
dense pixel prediction [217, 225, 138] dramatically improves the performance of
contour detection, surpassing a significant margin over preceding standard CNN
based methods and even surpassing the empirical accuracy of human annotators.
These advantages dramatically affect the medical image domain.
Different from natural images, medical images do not have rich semantic in-
formation, effective usage of low-level edge information is the key to support
accurate segmentation. Moreover, the failure of detecting edges will cause huge
issues in diagnostic precision, for example, the failure of segmenting touching
cells will cause abnormal cell size statistics. Therefore, contour detection is usu-
ally treated as an intermediate step for image segmentation. Some segmentation
studies have implicit contour detection because the main challenging of object
segmentation is the accurate location of edges (this paper will take such kinds
of segmentation methods into the consideration), such as segmenting neuronal
membranes in electron microscopy images [34] and vessels in retinal images [56].
We have witnessed numerous state-of-the-art CNN based methods being success-
fully applied to medical image contour detection and segmentation [28, 139, 171].
However, direct technical transferring sometimes conceals several critical prob-
lems in the medical images but may not being concerned in the natural image
domain, such as the detection of weak edges, the processing of discontinuity of
3
Prostate CTRetinal
Pancreas MRI
Lung chest MRI
Muscle H&E
Breast H&E Breast H&EBrain H&E
Figure 1: The left side shows four kinds of CT, MRI, or tomography organ images. The right side
shows three kinds of microscopic images. Segmenting the objects (e.g. pancreas or nucleus) needs
clear detection of object contours. In breast or muscle images, detecting contours is obviously very
challenging due to the severe touching objects and artifacts.
contours, and the detection of edges from high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) images.
The solutions to these problems are significant in medical image analysis.
We start by discussing the difficulties of edge/contour detection in medical
image computing and review some conventional approaches in Section 2 To bet-
ter understand the development of CNNs in image contour detection, we briefly
introduce the principle of CNNs in Section 3 and discuss most state-of-the-art
CNN based methods for edge detection in Section 5, with the goal to clarity the
key problems they are addressing and their advantages for medical image usage.
After understanding the principle of CNNs for contour detection, in Section 6, we
review recent methods for medical image contour detection and segmentation to
help understand underlying technical basics of current methods in medical image
analysis and build the connection to the state-of-the-art method in the computer
vision community, and also show the limitations of current methods. Section 7
discusses some key problems and potential directions. Section 8 concludes the
paper. We expect this paper can cover the necessary technical advances in CNNs
that is useful for contour detection and, more importantly, can attract attentions of
the underlying problems and lead to further exploration of the CNN technologies
in medical image analysis.
4
2. Overview of Contour Detection for Medical Images
In this section, we provide an overview of the challenges and significance
of image contour detection in medical images. Then we review several kinds
of conventional directions for medical image contour detection, with the goal to
encourage inspirations in CNN designing.
2.1. Challenges and significance
Compared with natural images containing all kinds of semantic objects, med-
ical images are more modality-specific such that in one modality, there is less
semantic and texture information inside or between objects. In radiological data
like pancreas MRI or CT or ultrasound images, the targeting objects are organs or
bones. In pathological images like hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stained lung cell
specimens [50, 218, 130], the targeting objects are cells and diseased regions. Or-
gans and cells usually have consistent appearance. Therefore, object shapes and
structures play a key role for medical image segmentation or detection. Figure 1
shows some types of medical images that need careful process of object contours
to achieve accurate segmentation.
The image quality defection due to the acquisition and imaging processes is
common and significant [202, 226]. Noises bring obstacles to edge detection be-
cause it reduces the contrast of real edges and also introduce spurious edges due
to noisy contrast. Although applying denoising algorithms before some local edge
detection can reduce the effects to some extent, this approach has been shown not
very promising [152]. A global method with some prior knowledge of targeting
objects is supposed to overcome the effects of local noises. The fine detection of
edges and global object contours are equally important and require discrimination
when prediction. For example, in retinal images, the detection and segmentation
of blood vessels require very fine detection of subtle edges. While in pathological
images, ignoring gradients caused by staining noises and boundaries of small cells
is critical.
Detecting weak or broken edges due to occlusion or staining artifacts between
touching or overlapping objects is a long-term studied problem in medical im-
age analysis. Sometimes detecting these kinds of edges which are even visually
in-discriminative seems impossible, but learning to link the broken edges is a re-
medial measure [69]. We believe this problem is an active research topic of the
contour detection. In the earlier stage, deformable models [91, 23, 223, 22] are
popular techniques to guarantee the continuity and smoothness of object contours,
because active contour models use a parametric or non-parametric representation
5
to initialize object boundaries and transform these closed contours to align with
objects. However, currently this area is not active because active contour is built
on particular assumptions. Recently, we have seen work [174] that train CNNs to
predict the movement of active contours.
Besides direct contour detection, [214, 197, 109] have studied how to detect
global, closed, or convex object contours from a set of broken contour pieces
containing interesting edges and noisy edges. However, these methods are diffi-
cult to generalize to real datasets due to the relied assumptions, such as bilateral
symmetry of objects. Additionally, [167] have studied contour completion using
conditional random field (CRF) models, and [120] extends the technique to han-
dle medical images. [227] and [198] use RNNs and autoencoders [78] to achieve
contour completion.
High-level reasoning is an important factor for contour completion. Human
can easily recognize the broken edges between objects and identity touching or
overlapping objects, although the actual gradient in the broken edges is hardly
seen. We believe there are two reasons at least [182, 178, 81, 101]:
1. Human vision has a strong reasoning ability by observing surrounding ob-
ject contours connecting to the broken points, and thus it can easily recog-
nize and predict the existence of broken edges.
2. Human vision has high-level prior knowledge about the observing objects’
appearance [101], so it can estimate rough object appearance and reject
unfamiliar appearance (touched and connected multiple objects).
Both need to take advantage of the context information. However, as we previ-
ously discussed, most of previous CNN based contour detection and segmentation
methods do not focus on this kind of context information. In semantic segmenta-
tion tasks, we have noticed a lot of work to model the context information using
methods like CRF and markov random field (MRF) [117, 119, 3, 110, 31, 235, 31,
125]. The inference of edges is supposed to be more difficult because it contains
less semantic knowledge and require more complex understanding of shapes and
structures of objects. For example, [55] have studied occlusion boundary detec-
tion by exploring deep context from CNNs, including local structural boundary
patterns, observations from surrounding regions, and temporal context.
In addition, the effective learning from limited annotated data is an significant
topic because of the difficulty in collecting large-scale medical image datasets.
Usually CNNs require large-scale datasets to train. Semi-supervised and unsuper-
vised learning methods [112] and transfer learning [189, 206] are recently been
discussed in the study of CNNs. In addition, a better CNN architecture design can
6
significantly increase the efficiency of parameter utilization. We will discuss the
details in the following.
2.2. Previous medical image contour detection
Conventional contour detection and segmentation methods before the preva-
lence of deep learning have numerous directions in medical image computing, and
a comprehensive review can be found in [222].
Intensity thresholding [60] is one of the early-stage approaches for medical
image segmentation. For some specific image modalities, such as fluorescence
microscopy images, where the target objects (e.g., nuclei or cells) are usually
brightly stained in a dark background, it is effective to apply intensity thresholding
to object segmentation [32]; however, it is difficult for thresholding to handle other
image modalities (e.g., H&E stained images), especially for touching or partially
overlapped objects.
Watershed transform [170] is a popular segmentation method in medical im-
ages [226], which pursues the ‘catchment basins’ (gradient discontinuity points).
It can be used to find the continuous contours of objects, and therefore it is popular
at segmenting multiple objects like cells in pathological images [143]. However,
watershed usually suffers from over-segmentation, and thus marker-controlled
watershed [60] has been proposed for effective contour detection and segmen-
tation. An alternative method to handle over-segmentation is to merge falsely
segmented regions with certain criteria [115].
One widely-studied direction for medical image contour detection and seg-
mentation is deformable models [42]. Deformable model based methods focus
on deforming an initial active contour to align the object boundary by solving
an energy function. Representative deformable models include geodesic mod-
els or level-set models (such as Chan-Vese model [23]) [22], parametric models
(Snake [91] and GVF [223]). Many related work has been proposed for object
contour delineation [220, 233, 111, 39] and some of them are combined with shape
prior modeling for touching object segmentation in medical images [2, 221]. One
potential limitation of deformable models is the requirement of proper contour
initialization, which might be achieved using effective object detection methods
[222].
Graph-based methods are another popular category of methods for medical
image contour detection and segmentation. In graph partition, the max-flow/min-
cut algorithm [17, 16] is usually used to minimize an energy function, and it has
been successfully applied to contour detection in medical images [1, 24]. Nor-
malized cut [188] is proposed to avoid the bias of favoring small sets in the global
7
Maxpooling
Input layer Conv layerConv kernel Fully connected layer
Maxpooling
Maxpooling
Input 
image Prediction
Figure 2: An illustration of the architecture of a CNN, including five convolutional layers, three
max pooling layers, and two three fully connected layers. The first convolutional layer takes an
input image and the last fully connected layer predicts the label.
minimum cut, and a generalized normalized cut [11] has been proposed for object
segmentation in microscopy images. Some other graph partitioning methods such
as random walk [64] and isoperimetric partitioning [65] have been also reported
for object segmentation in medical image data.
Conventional machine learning methods have been applied to medical image
contour detection and segmentation. For pixel-wise classification-base segmenta-
tion, it is usually necessary to conduct further processing to split touching objects
[98]; for superpixel-wise classification, it would improve the computational effi-
ciency, but the pre-generated superpixels need to well adhere real object bound-
aries [88]. In addition, the conventional machine learning approaches require
manual feature representation design, which is not a trivial task in some medi-
cal applications.
3. Convolutional Neural Networks
In this section, we briefly introduce the basic concept of CNNs. As the pre-
decessor of CNN, ANN is originally inspired by the goal of modeling biological
neural systems. Its organization simulates the mechanism of information trans-
mission in the brain neuron. The computation unit contains a linear transforma-
tion zi =
?
iwixi + b plus an activation function yi =
1
1+e?zi
(e.g. Sigmoid) on
the input x and generate an output y. w = [w1, ..., wn]T is the weights function
connecting previous neurons to next neutron. Computation units are connected
8
one after another, which compose a layer-wise organized architecture. When con-
necting to the output layer, a Softmax or Sigmoid function is often used to map
the output to [0, 1], representing label probabilities. The above formulation is a
very basic ANN design, which primarily models the biological neuron system.
After that, the design of ANN towards to the machine learning and engineering
guidance.
3.1. Architecture
CNN has a very similar architecture with ANN, which is composed by a se-
ries of computational layers [104]. Each layer contains a set of neurons and may
have learnable parameters to decide how the neutrons between layers are con-
nected. Therefore, the overall architecture is structured by cascaded layers. Figure
2 shows a CNN architecture with eight layers.
The main building brick is the convolutional (Conv) layer, whose Conv ker-
nels (or filters) perform convolutional operation across the whole image spatial
locations to generate output image representations (i.e. feature maps). The spatial
extent of kernels refer to as the receptive field. This local connectivity through
the receptive field is originally inspired by the brain neuron science [49]. Pooling
layer is inserted between Conv layers for the purpose of downsampling the fea-
ture map dimension. The most common used pooling layer is max pooling, which
keeps the highest response value in an image extent and discard the rest, and per-
form this operation crossing the whole image. Activation layers map data points
non-linearly. The appropriate settings of activations is critical to the behaviors of
CNN training. The most common used activation at present for CNN is ReLU
[149], which simply performs y = max(0, x). It is applied after a Conv layer or
a fully connected layer. ReLU is an important technique for modern CNNs. Pre-
vious activation functions such as Sigmoid and Tanh suffer from strong gradient
vanishing (or gradient saturation) problems [59], which can be accumulated and
getting severer as the layer increases.
Apart from the basic layers, there are a variety of layers proposed by mod-
ern CNNs. For example, Dropout [195] and batch normalization [85] are now
standard configurations in the CNN design patterns. Modified/generalized convo-
lutional layers [228, 126], ReLU layers [129], and pooling layers [231] are also
specifically designed for various applications. We will discuss some of them in
the following.
9
3.2. Network training
Recently, the improvement of the optimization algorithm, hardware capacity,
and functional deep learning libraries, make the training more easier than before.
A beginner with moderate experiences can deploy the training of very deep net-
works in a few lines of code on a GPU. The main component of CNN training is
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) [15] and backpropagation [105].
SGD minimizes the empirical risk of the loss function J(?) by updating the
parameters ?:
?t+1 = ?t ? ?
m?
1
??E[J(?)] (1)
where n is the number of observed training data and ? is the learning rate. SGD
randomly sample a mini-batch of m samples from total training samples and up-
date the parameters using the averaged gradients generated by mini-batch sam-
ples. Standard SGD could easily trap at local optima and lead to slow convergence
[201]. Then momentum method is introduced to resolve this problem by control-
ling the gradient velocity during optimization [201]. The SGD with momentum is
defined as
vt+1 = ?vt ? ?
m?
1
??E[J(?)] (2)
?t+1 = ?t ? vt+1 (3)
where ? ? [0, 1] is the momentum coefficient. Based on the basic SGD with
momentum, there are also new algorithms to improve the training efficiency and
lead to better convergence, such as Nesterov momentum [201], Adagrad [48],
RMSprop [76], Adam [95]. Selecting a appropriate learning rate is tricky. The
last three can adaptively adjust the learning rate per parameter at each update,
which have been shown to lead to faster convergence. Current state-of-the-art
methods still use different optimization algorithms based on specific applications.
The optimal choice depends on specific problems.
Backpropagation propagates the errors computed in the loss layers back to all
proceeding layers. Every computational layer will generate the gradient w.r.t. its
own parameters accordingly. The overall procedure follows the basic chain rule.
Let’s define the object function J as
J(x, g; ?) =
1
m
m?
i=1
loss(gi, f(xi; ?)), (4)
10
where loss computes the difference between the prediction f(xi; ?) and the groundtruth
gi. There are various types of loss functions, such as Cross-entropy, Softmax,
Euclidean distance, Max-margin, etc, for botch classification and regression pur-
poses. f denotes overall function of CNN, so f takes an input image x and outputs
yL as its predicted label. Suppose yL is computed by a fully connected layer (the
L- layer of the network), defined as
yL = ?(WLyL?1 + bL) (5)
where yL?1 is the output of the (L? 1)-th layer. ? is the activation function. The
gradient of J w.r.t WL and yL?1 is defined as:
?J
?WL
=
?J
?yL
· ?yL
??
· ??
?WL
, (6)
?J
?yL?1
=
?J
?yL
· ?yL
??
· ??
?yL?1
(7)
Eq. (6) computes the gradients respecting to the weights of layer L and Eq. (7)
computes the gradients respecting to the input yL?1 of layer L.
Successfully training CNN networks is not as simple as its mathematical def-
inition. The overall optimization is highly non-convex and the process is dif-
ficult to visualize. Overfitting is one of the long-term challenge actively stud-
ied in the community. There are a wide range of well-investigated approaches
that substantially alleviate CNN training difficulties, for instance, data augmenta-
tion, weight initialization [77, 201, 58, 72], regularizations [195, 213], activations
[149, 59, 63, 129, 35], normalization [85], and skip-connection [73]. We refer
readers to [68] for more details.
4. State-of-the art CNN Architectures
In this section, we introduce several well-known CNN architectures, which
are recognized as the milestone in the CNN development and the basement of
various computer vision tasks, specially image edge detection. We also discuss
the related variations to address specific problem in CNNs, such as ensembling,
generalization, etc. The performance of these CNNs is publicly validated on the
annual ImageNet Large Scale Image Recognition Challenge (ILSIRC). Figure 3
shows the winner networks of ImageNet challenges in the past five years. From
2010 to 2015, the classification error rate has decreased by more than nine times.
11
4.1. CNN architecture benchmarks
LeNet stands for the first successful application of CNN. It is proposed by [104]
and used for hand-written digit recognition. ConvNet to allow the weight shar-
ing between neurons, which dramatically decreases the heavy parameters needed
in ANNs. This network is much shallower compared with recent architectures,
including 2 Conv layers with an intermediate subsampling layer and 2 fully con-
nected layers. The main contribution of this work is the usage of local connection
to replace the fully connection between network neurons of conventional ANNs.
AlexNet is recognized as the first deep CNN which is successfully applied onto
large-scale image recognition, which is proposed by [102]. It won the 2012 IL-
SIRC. AlexNet has a quite similar architecture with LeNet but has more Conv
layers. AlexNet has some better solutions to prevent the overfitting and gradi-
ent vanishing problem. First, AlexNet uses the ReLU [149] activation to replace
Sigmoid. Second, it applies local response normalization (LRN) scheme before
each ReLU to further prevent gradient vanishing effect. LRN is an another way to
normalize the data for model generalization. Basically, it normalizes the response
value at each receptive fields (divided by the sum of the same spatial location),
which force the response value to be in a relative small range. Third, it uses over-
lapped pooling kernels. General max pooling applies non-overlapping kernels
subsample the feature map. Overlapped pooling is just changing the kernel size
larger than stride. The paper argues that overlapping kernels is helpful to prevent
overfitting. Fourth, AlexNet uses Dropout to prevent overfitting. Overall, AlexNet
has 5 Conv layers and 3 fully connected layers with totally 60M parameters (dom-
inated by the three fully connection layers). This number is very large compared
with recent CNNs.
ZFNet is proposed by Zeiler and Fegus [231], which won the 2013 ILSIRC. This
network has very similar architecture with AlexNet but more detailed hyperpa-
rameter tunning and smaller kernels of bottom Conv layers. ZFNet has 75M pa-
rameters. The main contribution of this paper is unpooling and deconvolution,
which enable the visualization of the hidden layers. Unpooling and deconvolution
are quite novel and ‘uncommon’ combination in CNNs. The usage of these two
layers can project deep feature maps to the image space, so as to deeply visual-
ize image features highlighted. Nowadays it has become a very popular research
topic [183, 25, 154, 131].
VGGNet [191] is very popular network not only in image classification but also
in many other applications [217, 225, 138]. It obtains the second best results in
12
2015
ResNet
2014 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010
GoogleNet VGG ZFNet AlexNet
22 layers
19 layers
8 layers
8 layers
Shallow
ILSVRC Challenge
Winner
28.2
25.8
16.4
11.7
7.3
6.7
3.6
100+ layers
Figure 3: The ImageNet ILSVRC challenge results (top-5 error (%))) from 2010 to 2015. AlexNet
achieves a very large margin improvement with deeper network than before. The number of layers
is continuously increasing as the accuracy increases. ResNet conquers the barrier of training
network over 100 layers, much deeper than previous winners.
ILSIRC 2014, right behind GoogleNet. Its architecture is quite neat and unique
compared with GoogleNet. It has five sets of Conv units. All feature maps in
each unit has the same dimension and number. Units are connected by max-
pooling layers. VGGNet has a 16-layer and a 19-layer version. VGG has 140M
parameters. Thanks to its clean and regular architecture and available pre-trained
models, VGG gives researches flexibility to manipulate to internal layer represen-
tations. Thus it is the mostly widely-used architecture for high-level computer
vision tasks, such as semantic segmentation and edge detection.
GoogleNet is proposed by [204]. It won the ILSIRC 2014 and largely outperforms
AlexNet. Moreover, GoogleNet only has 12X fewer parameters than AlexNet yet
much deeper (22 layers). The main contribution of this paper is the introduction
of the Inception module, with the aim to better utilize the representations in net-
work layers. The basic Inception module takes an input from an layer and pass to
multiple different and independent layers (such as 3 × 3 Conv layer, 5 × 5 Conv
layer, max pooling layers) in parallel, then the layers’ output are merged together.
Different kernel sizes capture multi-scale information. The inception module has
been extended as four progressive versions.
Inception V2 [85] introduces batch normalization. Inception V3 [205] dis-
cusses and summarizes the design principles of the inception module in detail.
13
For instance, factoring 5 × 5 kernels to two small 3 × 3 kernels increases com-
putational efficiency and training speed. Inception V4 [203] is the latest version
(including multiple variants). This study braces the idea of residual networks
(ResNet) [73] into their design. It also introduces the residual scaling to prevent
the instabilities when number of filters exceed 1000.
GoogLeNet uses a global average pooling (averaging the value in the win-
dow) to transforms the feature maps of the last Conv layer to a vector and only
one fully connected layer is used to perform prediction. Average pooling layer has
been recognized as a good alternative to fully connected layer after the last Conv
layer since it saves the majority of parameters coming from the fully connected
layer and has intrinsic regularization effects for modal generalization. This con-
figuration is first applied by Network in Network (NIN) [118], another interesting
network architecture which builds multilayer perceptron between Conv layers to
enhance the local region information abstraction. Most recent CNNs use this con-
figuration as the classification module.
ResNet is the most successful CNN in recent two years, developed by [73, 74].
It is the first CNN that overcomes the barrier of training networks with more than
1,000 layers. ResNet won the 1st place in ImageNet classification, detection,
localization, COCO detection and COCO segmentation. The idea of ResNet has
been largely extended and widely used in image classification [212, 83, 82, 207,
164, 203, 181], contour detection [138], object detection [122].
We have a common understanding that deeper network can give rise to better
abstraction, but when depth increases to some level, extra layers will hurt the
performance. The initial motivation of ResNet is raised by a common question:
why it is difficult to train very deep networks?
For examples, suppose we can train a 30 layer network, when the depth in-
creases to 30 + 10. The error rate will rise up [71, 196]. However, intuitively, if
we setting the extra 10 layers as identity mapping, i.e., passing the same output
of 30-th layer the next 10 layers. The error rate should be the same. However,
this simple identity mapping operation seems difficult for CNN to learn directly.
So the author argues that the difficult of training very deep network is due to
optimization issue but not architecture itself. To overcome this difficult, ResNet
suggests to instead allow CNNs to learn residual mapping, which is expected to
be easier than learning identity mapping.
Let’s define the ideal underline mapping as H(x). ResNet lets the computa-
tional units (convolutions) model the mapping of F(x) = H(x) ? x. Therefore,
the targeting mapping becomesF(x)+x. This formulation is converted to a novel
14
Convolutional layer
ReLU
Convolutional layer
ReLU
Figure 4: The illustrate of identity mapping in ResNet. The figure shows an residual unit including
an identity mapping and two convolutional layers.
architecture computational unit with skip-connection, as illustrated in Figure 4.
This unit is called “residual unit”. The overall network is constructed by stack-
ing such computational unit. The concept of skip-connection in neural networks
stems from [163] and Highway Network [196], which acts like a gate function to
selectively allow the information pass to the following layers.
The general form of the residual unit is defined as
yl = F(xl) + h(xl)
xl+1 = f(yl)
(8)
where h is identity mapping and f is ReLU in the original ResNet architecture
[73]. Fl is composed by a set of Conv units associated with batch normalization,
activations and optionally Dropout. As can be observed, xl is not completely iden-
tity mapping but projected by ReLU after addition. A follow-up paper [74] pro-
poses ‘pre-activation’ to allow complete gradient backpropogation during training
(explained as follows). ‘pre-activation’ makes the ReLU inside F , which results
in the new residual unit definition:
xl+1 = F(xl) + xl (9)
This new modification actually is a simple solution to the long-term gradient van-
ishing issue in CNN training. Specifically, in l-th of L residual units of ResNet,
the forward output yl and the gradient of the loss L w.r.t yl is defined as
yl = Fl(yl?1) + yl?1 (10)
15
?L
?yl
=
?L
?yL
(1 +
?
?yl
L?1?
i=l
F(yi)) (11)
Thanks to the addition scheme, the information from prior layers (i.e., yl?1 in
forward and ?L
?yL
in backward) can flow directly to previous layers without passing
to any weight layer. Since the weight layers can vanish the gradient, this property
is able to deal with the gradient vanishing effects when training the depth of the
network increases [157, 74].
This simple solution provides subsequent advantages. Several follow-up stud-
ies [74, 212, 83] gradually reveal them as discussed in the following. An remark-
able paper worth to mention is stochastic depth network [83] built on ResNet.
Since training deep network suffers from overfitting and very deep network is
usually difficult and inefficient to train. Stochastic depth network trains network
with random depth during training stage. Since in each residual network the data
from bottom has two paths: F(x) and x, if the data does not pass some F(x), the
actual network depth decreases by some ratios. So during the training, the idea is
to randomly block some F(x) in every mini-batch forward with probability p (i.e.
output zeros). Each residual unit could have individual p (named survival rate).
The method has a comprehensive discussion of the settings of p. While during
testing, all F(x) functions are applied (scaled by 1 ? p). Intuitively, this design
braces the idea of Dropout and ensemble learning, which significantly improves
the generalization of ResNet.
[212] argues that ResNet is actually the ensembles of exponential number of
relative shallower networks (also mentioned by [83]). As mentioned in the last
paragraph, each residual unit has two paths to allow data flow to next layers. Sup-
pose we have n such residual units, totally there are 2n number of paths, yielding
2n plain networks with different depths. This paper has experimentally verified
its argument. Moreover, it has shown the independence between residual units,
in other word, removing some residual units does not influence the results sub-
stantially. However, removing a single layer from VGG will cause a huge issue.
Swapout [192] pushes the ensemble into an extreme, by combining ResNet, the
stochastic depth network, and Dropout.
DenseNet [82] replaces the addition of residual unit with concatenation to al-
low dense connection between layers, which results in better better feature usage.
This strategy implicitly uses multi-layer representations to increase the perfor-
mance. Wide ResNet [230] introduces a widen factor and shows that increasing
width of layers rather than only depth gives rise to better performance, higher
training efficiency, and less memory usage. ResNet of ResNet (RoR) adds an-
16
Figure 5: The visualization of contour detection results on the BSDS500 dataset. The first and
second rows show the input image and groundtruth. The third, fourth, fifth rows show the results
of basic Canny detector (1989) [21], SE (2013) [44], and HED (2015) [217] detectors, respectively.
SE and HED are learning based methods. As can be observed, current methods can generate more
clear edge maps and be aware of object contours and internal or background edges.
other level of identity mapping and shows better performance. ResNeXt [216]
introduces a cardinality factor inside ResNet by repeating homogeneous residual
transformation inside a residual unit.
Generalization The addition operation is effective in practice for general network
training. One main reason is because the addition operation of skip-connection
can intrinsically ensemble outputs of modules during forward and equally split the
gradients to two paths and may merge them later on during backward. This ‘aver-
aging’ behavior can stabilize the gradients. We have observed various kinds of ap-
plications that take benefits from this skip-connection mechanism [127, 158, 93].
Skip-connection encourages the multi-scale feature fusion to prevent small infor-
mation loss and makes the network training for efficiency due to better gradi-
ent backpropagation. Both characteristics are favorable to medical images. [47]
specifically discusses the importance of skip-connection in medical image analy-
sis.
17
Table 1: Comparison of edge detection on the BSDS500 dataset with standard evaluation
metrics[141], including F-measure, precision/recall (PR) curves, and average precision (AP). The
F-measure score is reported at fixed optimal threshold (ODS) and per-image threshold (OIS). AP
is the area under the PR curve. Human annotator accuracy is shown in the first block. The sec-
ond block shows several early-state unsupervised methods. The third blocks shows conventional
supervised methods. The last block shows recent CNN based methods. As can be observed, CNN
based methods improve previous approaches by a large margin.
ODS OIS AP
Human .80 .80 -
Canny [21] .60 .64 .58
Felz-Hutt [53] .61 .64 .56
Normalized Cuts [38] .64 .68 .48
Mean Shift [36] .64 .68 .56
ISCRA [169] .72 .75 .46
gPb-owt-ucm [5] .73 .76 .70
Sketch Tokens [114] .73 .75 .78
SE [44] .74 .76 .78
SE-Var [45] .75 .77 .80
MCG [6] .75 .78 .76
SE-u [112] .72 .75 .76
PMI [86] .74 .77 .78
SemiContour [234] .73 .75 .78
DeepNet [96] .74 .76 .76
N4-field [56] .75 .77 .78
DeepEdge [12] .75 .77 .81
DeepContour [186] .76 .77 .80
CSCNN [84] .76 .78 .80
HFL [14] .77 .79 .80
HED [217] .79 .81 .84
HED-u[112] .73 .75 .76
CEDN [225] .79 .80 .82
RDS [123] .79 .81 .82
COB [138] .79 .82 .85
PixelNet [8] .80 .81 .83
RCF [124] .81 .83 -
18
5. Image Contour Detection
In this section, we first briefly review the history literature of edge/contour
detection. Then, we introduce the pioneer work of CNN based contour detection
methods. Next, we introduce an important end-to-end CNN, supporting present
state-of-the-art contour detection methods, and the details of some other break-
through contour detection methods. Finally, we highlight the shortcomings of
existing methods. Figure 5 qualitatively compares the contour detection results of
several strongly foundational contour detection methods on the image contour de-
tection and segmentation benchmark (Berkeley segmentation dataset), BSDS500
[5]. Better edge detection methods have stronger ability to detect object contours
while ignoring internal edges inside objects or background. Some advanced meth-
ods are widely used in medical images but some are barely used. We discuss the
strengthens and weakness and clarity their favors to medical images.
In Table 1, we compare the contour detection performance of several remark-
able contour detection methods under standard evaluation metrics. We discuss the
compared methods in the following.
5.1. Historical overview of contour detection
There is a very long and rich history of literature for edge detection [21, 99,
161, 140, 137, 156, 190, 236]. The early-stage Canny detector [21] computes
the local brightness discontinuities and produces continuous edges. Estimating
the local changes using global and local cues with multiscales is critical of many
following edge detection methods. There are a variety of directions for contour
detection using local oriented filters [147, 160, 54], spectral clustering [38, 208,
5, 136], sparse reconstruction [132, 215], supervised learning [43, 132], and so on
[128, 36, 142]. We refer readers to [156, 136] for detailed categorization.
There are several remarkable edge detection methods still used by recent state
of the arts. Global probability of boundary (gPb) detector [5, 136], which is devel-
oped by Arbelaez and Malik, computes local orientated gradient features (bright-
ness, color, and texture) based on [141] and the multiscaling strategy [166], and
then computes global spectral partitions with normalized cut to achieve the glob-
ally oriented contour information [133]. This globalization mechanism differs
from the earlier Pb detector [141]. This method produces quite clear and effec-
tive edges than previous methods. Various methods based on gPb is developed
[215, 135, 6, 94, 229] for contour detection and segmentation with the focus
on both efficiency and accuracy. More importantly, [5] also presents an edge
based segmentation method called oriented watershed and ultrametric contour
19
Deconvolution
1x1 convolutional 
Addition
Figure 6: The architecture of FCN. The main part of the CNN architecture adopts the VGG archi-
tecture. FCN uses side outputs to extract intermediate layer feature maps. The 1 × 1 convolution
is used to generate multi-class segmentation masks. All predictions are unsampled to the image
space and added as the final result.
map (OWT-UCM) (first published in [4]). The overall method for both contour
detection and segmentation is well recognized as gPb-owt-ucm in following liter-
ature. The OWT-UCM technique and its multi-scaling improved version, Multi-
scale combinatorial grouping (MCG), are still used by latest CNN based contour
detection method to generate object proposals or computing thin edges. However,
gPb is very inefficient for practical usage. After that, the study of edges tends to
learning based [43], which offers much efficiency and accuracy gains. A critical
method is the Structured Edge (SE) detector developed by [44, 45], which is an
excellent improvement of SketchToken [114]. SE can be recognized as the most
successfully edge detector using random forest with structured outputs [100]. The
main idea is to use structured learning (i.e.structured random forests [100]) to
densely predict inherent structures of patches, such as straight lines, parallel lines,
curves, T-junctions, Y-junctions, etc. The patch with inherent edge structures is
called sketch token in the community [168, 114]. SE is very efficient (60 FPS)
compared with gPb-owt-ucm 1/240 FPS and leads the performance of the contour
detection field for quite a while, before it is largely surpassed by the introduction
of CNN. Many variants of SRF are proposed after then for image edge detection
and segmentation [148, 6, 211, 210, 186, 45, 234], and it is also popular in medical
images [121].
20
5.2. Pioneer CNN-based contour detection
The performance of edge detection increases significantly in recent two years.
We outline the discussed CNN based methods in this section as pioneer work
because these methods mostly adopt conventional CNN with the inspirations from
previous edge detection methods to build the conception of edge patterns and
structures, multi-scaling, and so on. Following the convention neutral network, the
CNN based edge/contour detection takes a local patch around a centering pixel as
input and predicts label indicting whether the centering pixel is edge or non-edge.
[180] propose multiple networks’ outputs to perform segmentation and edges.
[84] (denoted as CSCNN) use a CNN as feature extractors and train a SVM to clas-
sify edges. [56] propose N4 field, i.e., using neural networks and nearest neighbor
search to retrieve the best matching edge pattern of local patches. [96], instead
of using CNNs, extracts feature using unsupervised generative models (RBM and
DBN) and train classifiers to predict edges. [13] propose DeepEdge, which use
multi-scale features from multiple layers and separate two task branches with
two losses, one is called classification branch which learns to predict the edge
likelihood (with a classification objective) whereas the other regression branch is
trained to learn the fraction of human labelers agreeing about the edge presence at
a given pixel. The outputs are combined to predict the edges.
Later on, [186] propose DeepContour to extract visual feature of local patches
and use the extracted features as additional features to the used features by the SE
detector. The local patches can be categorized into a limited number edge pat-
terns (tokens). Accurately recognizing these patterns is critical for better contour
detection. DeepContour uses this property to supervise CNN training to generate
rich and discriminative features, then it trains structured random forests to pre-
dict edges. This step can be viewed as an edge refinement process. DeepContour
achieved leading performance than previous methods.
The efficiency of contour detection is priority. The above methods still suf-
fer from the heavy dense prediction computations, making the edge prediction
particularly slower than the SE detector.
5.3. Fully convolutional network (FCN)
The introduction of FCN [126, 185] changes the standard of using CNN for
(pixel-wise) dense prediction, making the real-time prediction becomes possible
and as well largely improved performance, hence it benefits later contour detection
methods.
The technique of FCN is actually straightforward and simple. FCN allows the
network directly outputs a segmentation mask having the same dimension of the
21
input. Suppose the input RGB image has dimension 3 × H ×W . The output of
image will have the size C ×H ×W for C class semantic segmentation. In other
word, each spatial location of the segmentation mask predicts the probability of
its semantic label. Figure 6 illustrates the FCN architecture.
FCN uses VGG as the basic network architecture. We have discussed the
details of VGG previously. It contains 5 convolutional sets, with 5 2 × 2 max
pooling in between, which totally resizes the original input by 25. So the feature
map dimension of the last convolutional set is 512 × bH
32
c × bW
32
c. These feature
maps keep coarse spatial location where each spatial location stands for 32 × 32
region in the original image.
Instead of using the fully connected layer after the last convolution layer as
CNNs for image classification, FCN directly applies an 1 × 1 convolutional to
transform the 512-dimensional vector of each spatial location to the label space,
i.e., C-dimensional in this example, as the semantic label probability distribution.
Next, FCN adds an deconvolution (used as an upsampling operation) layer to en-
large feature maps from C × bH
32
c × bW
32
c to C ×H ×W , resulting a pixel-wise
segmentation mask. It is worth to mention that the terminology of deconvolution
used here is debatable, because it is not the conventional deconvolution operation
[232]. The one used here is actually a ’backward convolution’ operation, i.e., each
spatial pixel performs element-wise product with all the weights of the kernel and
expand the predictions (one for each weight value) as an image extent. Figure
7 explains this ‘deconvolution’ operations. The weights of the deconvolutional
layer can be initialized as a bilinear interpolation kernel and allow this deconvolu-
tion to act upsampling behavior. We name it upsampling in this paper because we
will introduce another strategy (i.e, unpooling plus deconvolution) next to achieve
structured outputs (see bottom of Figure 7 ). Training the network is straightfor-
ward. In the loss layer, every pixel contributes to the loss, all spatial locations
are summed. This variation does not break direct backpropagation. This training
strategy, i.e., inputting an image and outputting a pixel-wise prediction map, is
termed as end-to-end training.
This simple approach achieves surprising good results compared with previous
methods and the prediction is very efficient (less 1 second for an 500×500 image)
because the network does not need computational expensive fully connected lay-
ers and only once forward is needed to obtain the final results. To generate more
precise and robust prediction, FCN also proposes to build side outputs to make use
of the feature maps from multiple convolutional layers. Since convolutional layers
have different feature map dimensions, this approach in nature utilizes multi-scale
information. FCN-32s uses the one side-output to predict the segmentation. FCN-
22
Convolution Deconvolution
Swither
 4
Maxpooling Unpooling
Figure 7: The illustrate of convolution and deconvolution operation and maxpooling and unpooling
layer. The kernel size is 2 × 2. Convolution operation averages the values of a 2 × 2 region.
Deconvolution computes the values of the region value given one value. Maxpooling selects the
maximum response in each region. Unpooling uses the switcher information (saved the selected
location of the region in the maxpooling layer) to fill a value in the region, yielding a sparse feature
map.
8s uses three side-outputs and merge as the final results as shown in Figure 6.
This idea becomes the foundation of CNN based image segmentation and con-
tour detection crossing various image domains. Wide improvements have been
proposed in recent years [162, 155, 235, 117, 116, 70, 184, 31]
5.4. Holistically-nested edge (HED)
HED is the first method successfully applied FCN into contour detection. It
significantly improved previous methods. The main contribution of this paper is
the usage of FCN with side outputs and deep supervision [106]. Actually, the
concept of side output uses extra branches from intermediate layers to encourage
multi-scale feature reuse. Differently, the side outputs of HED are not directly
combined together to output a single mask (edge map here) as FCN does or dis-
crete label as DeepEdge does. Each side output is directly used to predict the
23
edge map. Since side-outputs connecting intermediate layers have different fea-
ture map dimensions, deconvolution layer (upsampling layer) is used to resize the
feature map to the original input image size. Each mapped output is passed to a
Sigmoid cross-entropy loss to perform pixel-wise binary prediction. The loss of
the network is define as
Lside(W ,w) =
S?
i=1
?iLiside(W ,w(i)), (12)
where Liside is the loss from i-th side output. W is the core network parameters.
?i is the loss weight. S is the number of slide outputs. Sine HED uses VGG16 as
the base network architecture. W refers to the parameters of its 5 convolutional
units. w(i) is the parameters of i-th side output. It is actually a 1×1 convolutional
to map the feature map to the label space (edge or non-edge).
Since edge pixel has much small portion than non-edge pixel in one image,
the loss is imbalanced per image. From machine learning perspective, unbalanced
training data is not undesirable for model optimization. HED introduces weight-
balanced loss, defined as follows:
L(i)side(W ,w) = ??
?
y?Y+
logPr(yj = 1|X;W ,w(i))
?(1? ?)
?
y?Y?
logPr(yj = 0|X;W ,w(i)),
(13)
where ? = |Y?|/|Y | and 1 ? ? = |Y+|/|Y |. |Y+| denotes the number of pixels
belong to edges according to groundtruth edge map Y . ? is the weight balancing
coefficient. Besides individual loss, all slide outputs are then fused together and
generate a fused output associated with a loss:
Lfuse = Distance(Y,
S?
i
?iY?
(i)), (14)
where Y? (i) is the predicted edge map by i-th side output. and ?i is the learnable
weights. Distance is also a Sigmoid cross-entropy loss to measure the pixel-wise
prediction error.
The training of this method is relatively light. It uses pre-trained VGG-16 as
initialization and train with a few thousands iteration to obtain the results. Note
that BSDS500 only has 200 training image. HED sample 100 test images and test
24
on the rest 100 images. In addition, the paper also discuss the inconsistence of
groundtruth. The outputs at deeper layers are coarse which will in nature ignore
detailed edges (such as background and object internal edges). To prevent very
fine annotations (containing many ‘noisy’ edges) of groundtruth from affecting
the convergence of supervision of deeper layers, the paper treats a pixel as edges
only it is labeled as edge in at least three annotations.
Side-output with deep supervision is fairly effective combination to boost the
performance of dense prediction tasks, because it maximizes the reuse of rich hier-
archical representations at different layers with different scale. The multi-scaling
property is also a well-known approach to improve the contour detection accuracy.
Most following work lies on the feature map re-usage to push the performance.
For example, [97] also trains multi-scale HED based on multi-scale inputs to fur-
ther boost BSDS500 accuracy. It has outperformed the empirical accuracy of
human annotator (.80 ODS). RCF [124] generalizes HED by using richer features
from all convolutional layers of a CNN, pushing the performance to .81ODS.
HFL [14] uses object-level features to accomplish low-level edge prediction,
because the human vision system uses object-level reasoning to locate edge points.
Specifically, it extracts object-level deep features from multiple layers of VGG-16
and use a MLP to classify edges. This method can be viewed as a special way
to use rich features from a pre-trained CNN. More interestingly, HFL extends its
network to the application of semantic boundary labeling and semantic segmen-
tation to show that low-level boundaries have positive effects to high-level vision
tasks.
Another analogous method is PixelNet [8], which highlights the usage of all
feature maps and uses a specially designed predictor (a MLP) for coherent se-
mantic segmentation and contour detection. PixelNet also discusses the sampling
of predicted pixels and mini-batch to reduce the unbalance of edge and non-edge
pixel ratio and the memory consumption.
In addition, HED has been applied and improved for different tasks. [187]
uses HED to extract object skeleton. [112] even train HED in an unsupervised
manner base don video optical flow by iteratively refining the model. Beyond
the natural image domain, HED is widely welcomed in medical image domain
because of its efficiency and multi-scaling scheme to handle resolution and scale
problems ubiquitous in medical images. We will discuss them in the following
section. There also several notable papers generalize HED [224, 20, 209, 224] for
various computer vision tasks in both natural image and medical image domains.
25
Encoder network Decoder network
Figure 8: The architecture of DeconvNet. DeconvNet includes an encoder to encode an input
image to a set of feature maps and the decoder to decode the encoding to a segmentation mask
through a set of unpooling layers (illustrated in Figure 7) and convolutional layers.
5.5. Encoder-Decoder network
Another noticeable network for contour detection is called Encoder-Decoder
network [225]. This network has very similar architecture with DeconvNet [151]
for semantic segmentation. The difference is that the encoder and decoder ar-
chitectures are asymmetric. The encoder part is identical to DeconvNet borrowed
from VGG-16, but the decoder part has light computational units. Instead of using
deconvolution layer, every unpooling layer is followed by a convolutional oper-
ation. Figure 8 illustrates the network architecture. This network is a successful
application of encoder-decoder style CNN architectures on contour detection.
Different from methods using side outputs or deep supervision, this method
directly uses the last convolutional layer of VGG-16 (this encoder part is fixed
during training) and uses a set of unpooling and convolutional to generate unsam-
pled prediction map. The feature map dimension of the last convolutional layer
is 32 times smaller than the input image. Small scale coarse prediction ignores
the detailed information such as short and weak edges, thus the generated contour
map ignores the background and object internal edges but only retains occlusion
boundaries [200]. So this method achieves significantly improved performance
than HED (57.0 ODS vs. 44.0 ODS) on the PASCAL val2012 dataset. Note
that this dataset contains only groundtruth of object contours. However, when
applied onto BSDS500 dataset where groundtruth contains fine edge annotations,
this method performs slightly worser than HED.
Compared with HED, this network is better capture overall object contours
using content information rather than small edges due to gradient changes. This
property is suitable to detect contours of medical image objects, such as organs.
26
5.6. Oriented contour detection
Using the global orientation to predict edges has been well studied previously
[188, 5]. Affinity matrices well capture pairwise local intensity changes by us-
ing a global graph embedding and the generated graph partitions preserve strong
edge information where each map highlights edges with one particular orienta-
tion. There are a few work considers the orientation information inside the CNN
training.
Affinity CNN [134] directly trains a network to output the affinity matrix. To
achieve that, this method trains 48 predictors (composed by convolutional layers)
to predict the affinity of each pixel to its 8 neighbors at 3 different scales (distances
of 1, 4, and 16 pixels). There are two losses functions supervised by pre-computed
affinity matrix and image edge groundtruth respectively.
Another remarkable work is called Convolutional Oriented Boundaries (COB)
[138]. Firstly, COB generalizes the side output and deep supervision scheme of
HED to obtain fine and coarse contour maps. To estimate the contour orienta-
tion, COB connects multiple small sub-networks to predict oriented edge maps
for each orientation bin. Each subnetwork is access to all side outputs with differ-
ent scales. To decide the final orientation of each pixel, COB computes the max
response of sub-network outputs respecting to different bins and may average the
two orientations if both oriented sub-networks have high responses. COB uses a
strong 50-layer ResNet as the basic network while most other methods we dis-
cussed use VGG-16. COB shows that using ResNet improves the performance
by a quite large margin. It demonstrates the important role of the basic CNN for
high-level applications.
Using orientation information is useful for medical images. For example, in
Lung X-ray image diagnosis, healthy images contain clear rib cage contour [41].
In this way, we can predict contours with semantic information to help diagnosis.
5.7. Weakly-supervised, semi-supervised and unsupervised edge detection
Obtaining the annotated contour detection dataset is very labor expensive. At
present, only the BSDS500 dataset has fine edge annotations. Dense prediction
tasks can obtain many pixel-wise label from a single image to optimize the pa-
rameters of CNNs, however we can still observe that the size of training data is
determinate [225, 138]. There are some yet limited work that studied how to in-
troduce unlabeled data to train or improve an edge detector [112, 234, 123, 92].
However, we only witnessed growing related literatures for semantic segmenta-
tion [79, 80, 155, 40].
27
[112] propose an unsupervised learning method of edges, which utilizes the
property of discontinuity around the edge pixels of motions to generate weak
annotations from a large video dataset. This method uses a quite sophisticated
process to generate clean annotations based on motion estimation techniques in-
cluding motion estimation, motion contour detection, and edge alignment. Using
motion cues for contour detection is proposed by [200]. Then, it treats the motion
estimation and contour detection as an iterative optimization process. At each it-
eration, the estimated edges are used as supervision to train an edge detector. The
trained edge detector is used to generate edge maps for better motion estimation
for next iteration. The paper conducts experiments using both SE and HED as
the base edge detector, showing than this kind of coarse-to-fine interaction train-
ing strategy does improve the performance of CNNs and structured random forest
classifiers. However, as the author stated, the generated annotations have noises
and have unable to generate fine edges, so it can hardly obtain the same or even
outperform the edge detector trained with strong supervision with human anno-
tations although more images are available. Besides unsupervised training, [234]
propose a semi-supervised structured ensemble learning method, which is built on
SE, to train an edge detector with only 3 labeled images and outperforms this un-
supervised method (see Table 1). However, this semi-supervised learning method
can not be used for CNNs. There is no work study about semi-supervised CNNs
for contour detection. [92] generate object contour supervision under multi-level
supervision and test the SE and HED detectors.
The coarse-to-fine CNN training paradigm for contour detection is embedded
into intermediate layers of a single CNN by [123]. This supervision is denoted as
relaxed deep supervision (RDS), which is used to improve a pre-trained HED with
a large set of coarse edge annotations. The motivation behind is that RDS relaxes
the human annotations (edge and non-edge points) to get more relaxed labels,
which is used to adapt to the diversities of intermediate layers. Relaxing labels is
produced by Canny, SE or HED detectors. The benefit of RDS is that it processes
the false positives using a “delayed strategy” to allow more discriminative layers
(deeper layers) handle difficult points and leave these difficult points ignored in
early layers. This is a validate way to achieve better network convergence.
Using less annotated data for training CNN is obviously essential for medical
image analysis. Unfortunately, this area is waiting to be explored.
28
Ta
bl
e
2:
O
ve
rv
ie
w
of
th
e
lit
er
at
ur
e
us
in
g
de
ep
le
ar
ni
ng
fo
r
va
ri
ou
s
ki
nd
s
of
m
ed
ic
al
im
ag
e
se
gm
en
ta
tio
n
th
at
ar
e
co
nt
ou
r
aw
ar
e.
M
os
t
m
et
ho
ds
us
e
en
d-
to
-e
nd
C
N
N
s
(F
C
N
or
H
E
D
)s
ch
em
e
to
pe
rf
or
m
pi
xe
l-
w
is
e
cl
as
si
fic
at
io
n.
Se
e
te
xt
fo
rm
or
e
de
ta
ile
d
ex
pl
an
at
io
ns
.
R
ef
er
en
ce
Ta
sk
M
et
ho
d
[3
4]
N
eu
ro
na
lm
em
br
an
e
se
gm
en
ta
tio
n
St
an
da
rd
C
N
N
s
w
ith
pa
tc
h-
w
is
e
pi
xe
lc
la
ss
ifi
ca
tio
n.
[5
6]
R
et
in
al
ve
ss
el
se
gm
en
ta
tio
n
U
si
ng
C
N
N
fe
at
ur
es
to
m
od
el
ed
ge
pa
tte
rn
sa
nd
ap
pl
y
ne
ar
es
ts
ea
rc
h
to
de
te
ct
ed
ge
s.
[1
71
]
B
io
m
ed
ic
al
im
ag
e
se
gm
en
ta
tio
n
A
no
ve
le
nd
-t
o-
en
d
C
N
N
(U
ne
t)
fo
rc
el
ls
eg
m
en
ta
tio
n
w
ith
sp
ec
ia
ld
es
ig
ns
fo
rc
on
-
to
ur
pr
es
er
vi
ng
.
[1
94
]
C
er
vi
ca
lc
el
ls
eg
m
en
ta
tio
n
E
xt
ra
ct
in
g
C
N
N
an
d
di
ff
er
en
tk
in
ds
of
fe
at
ur
es
to
le
ar
n
to
lo
ca
liz
e
ob
je
ct
co
nt
ou
rs
.
[1
98
]
C
el
ls
eg
m
en
ta
tio
n
A
n
au
to
en
co
de
r
ba
se
d
m
et
ho
d
to
re
co
ve
r
br
ok
en
ed
ge
s
be
tw
ee
n
to
uc
hi
ng
or
ov
er
-
la
pp
in
g
ce
lls
.
[2
8]
G
la
nd
se
gm
en
ta
tio
n
A
n
en
d-
to
-e
nd
C
N
N
us
es
m
ul
ti-
la
ye
rf
ea
tu
re
m
ap
s
to
pe
rf
or
m
co
nt
ou
rd
et
ec
tio
n
an
d
se
gm
en
ta
tio
n.
[2
9]
N
eu
ro
na
lm
em
br
an
e
se
gm
en
ta
tio
n
A
n
de
ep
ly
su
pe
rv
is
ed
C
N
N
to
ca
pt
ur
e
co
nt
ex
tu
al
in
fo
rm
at
io
n.
[1
39
]
R
et
in
al
im
ag
e
se
gm
en
ta
tio
n
U
si
ng
m
ix
ed
m
ul
ti-
la
ye
rf
ea
tu
re
m
ap
s
to
se
gm
en
tv
es
se
ls
an
d
op
tic
di
sc
.
[2
24
]
G
la
nd
se
gm
en
ta
tio
n
C
om
bi
ni
ng
FC
N
an
d
H
E
D
to
co
nd
uc
ts
eg
m
en
ta
tio
n
an
d
ed
ge
de
te
ct
io
n
to
ge
th
er
.
[1
72
]
Pa
nc
re
as
se
gm
en
ta
tio
n
Sp
at
ia
la
gg
re
ga
tio
n
w
ith
ra
nd
om
fo
re
st
to
co
m
bi
ne
ed
ge
an
d
in
te
ri
or
C
N
N
cu
es
of
or
ga
ns
.
[1
9]
Pa
nc
re
as
se
gm
en
ta
tio
n
A
gg
re
ga
tin
g
or
ga
n
co
nt
ou
r
de
te
ct
io
n
an
d
se
gm
en
ta
tio
n
re
su
lts
of
H
E
D
an
d
FC
N
th
ro
ug
h
co
nd
iti
on
al
ra
nd
om
fie
ld
s.
[4
6]
L
iv
er
se
gm
en
ta
tio
n
A
3D
de
ep
su
pe
rv
is
ed
FC
N
w
ith
an
ex
tr
a
co
nt
ou
rr
efi
ne
m
en
tp
ro
ce
ss
.
[3
0]
B
io
m
ed
ic
al
im
ag
e
se
gm
en
ta
tio
n
U
si
ng
R
N
N
s
to
m
od
el
th
e
in
tr
a-
sl
ic
e
an
d
in
te
r-
sl
ic
e
co
nt
ex
tr
ep
re
se
nt
ed
by
FC
N
to
se
pa
ra
te
to
uc
hi
ng
ob
je
ct
s.
[2
9]
[3
3]
Vo
lu
m
et
ri
c
Se
gm
en
ta
tio
n
T
he
3D
ve
rs
io
n
of
U
ne
t.
[1
45
]
Vo
lu
m
et
ri
c
Se
gm
en
ta
tio
n
V
N
et
w
ith
ne
w
di
ce
sc
or
e
dr
iv
en
lo
ss
fu
nc
tio
n
to
tr
ad
e-
of
fi
m
ba
la
nc
e
of
la
be
ls
.
[1
74
]
M
R
Is
eg
m
en
ta
tio
n
U
si
ng
C
N
N
s
to
pr
ed
ic
te
vo
lu
tio
n
of
ac
tiv
e
co
nt
ou
rs
fo
rc
on
to
ur
lo
ca
liz
at
io
n.
[1
44
]
U
ltr
as
ou
nd
an
d
M
R
Is
eg
m
en
ta
tio
n
A
ho
ug
h-
vo
tin
g
C
N
N
ha
s
ro
bu
st
co
nt
ou
re
xt
ra
ct
io
n
of
an
at
om
y.
[2
27
]
U
ltr
as
ou
nd
se
gm
en
ta
tio
n
U
si
ng
re
cu
rr
en
tm
em
or
y
ne
tw
or
ks
fo
rc
on
to
ur
co
m
pl
et
io
n.
[1
46
]
C
ar
di
ac
M
R
I
C
om
bi
ng
a
dy
na
m
ic
al
sy
st
em
an
d
a
C
N
N
to
m
od
el
th
e
co
nt
ou
rs
of
ob
je
ct
s.
[1
53
]
M
ul
ti-
m
od
al
ca
rd
ia
c
In
co
rp
or
at
in
g
pr
io
ra
na
to
m
ic
al
kn
ow
le
dg
e
(e
.g
.b
ou
nd
ar
ie
s
an
d
sh
ap
e)
in
to
ne
tw
or
k
tr
ai
ni
ng
.
29
6. Medical Image Contour Detection and Segmentation with CNNs
Deep learning has became the mainstream of medical image contour detection
and segmentation methods [89, 222, 67, 189, 173, 10, 153, 18]. In this section,
we review recent CNN based methods for medical image contour detection and
segmentation. Most reviewed paper aims at segmentation. We focus on the meth-
ods that use the abovementioned methods or are designed to be contour aware to
achieve more accurate segmentation. Table 2 summarizes the reviewed methods.
Detailed are discussed in the following.
[34] adopt the standard CNN as a patch-wise pixel classifier to segment the
neuronal membranes (EM) of electron microscopy images. This study is a pio-
neer work of using CNN for medical image segmentation. It won for ISBI 2012
EM image segmentation challenge and significantly outperforms other competing
methods. In [52], a CNN with an architecture specifically optimized for EM im-
age segmentation is presented. Compared to the original CNN, smaller receptive
field in the upper layers and deeper architecture are employed. Such optimized
design enables the network to learn better features from the local context with
increased non-linearity. Significant improvement in performance is validated on
the ISBI 2012 challenge [7]. [194] propose a segmentation system for cervical
cytoplasm and nuclei in which pixel-wise classification is obtained by multiple
convolutional networks trained for images at different scales. Then they use var-
ious kinds of features to learn to localize object contours and split the touching
objects.
The majority of contour detection and segmentation methods follows the struc-
ture of the FCN [126] and HED [217] networks. [171] propose U-net, an end-to-
end CNN that can take advantage of information from different layers. To handle
touching objects, a weighted loss is introduced to penalize the errors around the
boundary margin between objects. The proposed U-net achieved the best perfor-
mance on ISBI 2012 EM challenge dataset [7]. The state-of-the-art segmentation
performance on the EM dataset is achieved by a new deep contextual network pro-
posed in [29]. The deep contextual network adopts an architecture that is similar
to HED. The difference is that the final segmentation result is a combined ver-
sion of the segmentation results derived from different layers through an auxiliary
classification layer. In the forward propagation, such design can more efficiently
exploit the contextual information from different layers for edge detection. In
return, the lower layers can be deeply supervised through these auxiliary classifi-
cation layers. This is because the classification layers provide a short cut between
the lower layers and final segmentation error. [28, 27] propose a deep contour-
30
aware network for gland image segmentation. This method uses side outputs as
multi-tasking deep supervision. The detected contour map is merged with the
segmented binary mask to prevent touching of glands, which is a special treat-
ment to cell contours. This method won the 2015 MICCAI Gland Segmentation
Challenge [193]. In the following, [224] propose a multichannel side supervi-
sion CNN for gland segmentation. This network can be treated as a combination
of HED and FCN for simultaneous segmentation and contour detection. Simi-
larly, [150] propose a lymph node cluster segmentation algorithm based on HED,
FCN and structured optimization to address the contour appearances. [19] pro-
pose a data fusion step using CRF to adaptively consider the segmentation mask
generated by FCN and the contour map generated by HED for pancreas segmen-
tation. [172] propose to use random forest based spatial aggregation to integrate
semantic mid-level cues of deeply-learned organ interior and boundary maps to
segment pancreas with HED.[139] explores the combination of multi-layers’ fea-
ture maps to perform multi-task learning on vessel segmentation of retinal images.
[153] proposes to incorporate anatomical priors on anatomy (e.g. shape and la-
bel) structure into CNNs, so as to make the predictions anatomically meaningful,
especially for the case when input images have missing boundaries.
CNN based methods for 3D medical image segmentation have been attracting
attentions in recent two years. Most existing methods are extensions of known
2D CNNs. [46] propose a 3D deeply supervised network for Liver segmentation.
It can be viewed as a 3D extension of HED. Moreover, it uses a fully connected
CRF to refine the object contours. 3D Unet [33] is proposed by the same group
with U-net for 3D volumetric segmentation. [145] propose V-Net, which contains
a new loss function based on Dice coefficient to resolve the strong imbalance
between foreground and background. It uses the skip-connection strategy of Unet
to prevent the detail information loss which will affect fine contour prediction.
Besides the direct application of end-to-end CNNs for pixel-wise classifica-
tion, there are a number of interesting studies exploring the usage of CNNs or
RNNs to achieve better context information modeling (e.g. contour completion).
[198] propose to use stacked denoising autoencoder to restore the broken cell
boundaries for cellular segmentation in brain tumor and lung cancer pathology
images. Similar to [198], [90] propose a breast density segmentation method
based on a multi-scale CNN that is trained in an unsupervised way in which
an autoencoder is trained. During the unsupervised training, image patches and
their corresponding segmentation masks are randomly cropped and the network is
trained to reconstruct the segmentation masks. The unsupervisedly learned model
is used to extract features for pixel level classification. Therefore, the different
31
components are delineated. [227] use RNNs to achieve completion for ultrasound
images where the contours are unclear and broken. The RNN it used is called
bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory (BiLSTM) networks, which is able to
leverage past and future information to make prediction. [30] use RNN model
and propagate the contextual information of the third dimension of the 2D image
planes. A 2D CNN (i.e. U-net) extracts the hierarchy of contexts from 2D im-
ages and pass the information to RNN to leverage the inter-slice correlation for
3D segmentation. Their good results on fungus images, which contain very weak
boundaries between objects, demonstrate its ability of be aware of object contours.
[174] trains class-specific convolutional neural network to predict the evolution of
active contours as a vector field. This method is a new way to formulate the struc-
tured output of CNNs. [144] propose hough-CNN, a CNN with voting mechanism
along the contours of objects to localize anatomy centroid. A recent work [146]
combines CNNs with dynamic system theory for Cardiac organ contour detection.
This method takes advantage of an important concept in dynamical system, i.e.,
limit cycle, to represent the contours of the target object. Instead of classifying
pixels into label classes, they propose to predict a vector for each pixel and thus
a vector field is formed for an entire image. Based on the vector field, the organ
contour is detected through dynamic theory in which a limit cycle is detected as
the finally detected contour. The method needs very limited training data to train
the model.
7. Discussion
We have discussed the state-of-the-art image edge or contour detection meth-
ods in the computer vision community and we review their applications in the
medical image domain. Based on the discussed methods above, it can be observed
that the usage of CNNs in medical image contour detection and segmentation is
relatively crowded into a narrow line. Most work leverages on end-to-tend CNNs
for direct dense prediction. Extension towards to wide and new perspectives to
solve specific problems would be necessary for CNN development in medical im-
age analysis, but only a few literature exists. We discuss some interesting topics
and outline potential directions.
1) Multi-scaling Medical images intrinsically contain rich multi-scale infor-
mation such as the nucleoli and tumor regions in microscopic images. Using fine
features without much spatial information loss is important for contour detection.
From the popularity of HED in medical images, sufficient usage of the layers’ fea-
ture maps is as always promising. Moreover, the aggregation of HED is a way of
32
model resembling [97]. Ensembling offers a multi-scaling and averaging mech-
anism, which is important to generate smooth contours. Detailed explorations of
state-of-the-art CNNs, for example, ResNet [73] and DenseNet [82], are neces-
sary, which have skip-connection to strengthen feature map usage. Appropriate
usage of skip-connection to build very deep FCN is studied by [47]. RCF [124]
shows an extreme of using features from convolutional layers. Most studies en-
able multi-scaling with side outputs and optional deep supervision. From our
experience, the supervision at shallow layers usually has large losses which is
very difficult to overfit even on training data. Large losses will result in large
gradients and thereby disturb the error backpropagation of deeper layers. This is
also discussed by [123]. We think there should be more careful studies on the
consideration of effective deep supervision mechanism.
2) Transfer learning Transfer learning is gaining popularity in the medical
imaging domain. Several literature [206, 189, 67] have shown that fine-tuning
CNNs trained on natural image datasets helps improve the performance. Design-
ing highly effective network architectures needs rich experience, but borrowing or
modifying existing architectures alleviates the pains. Transfer learning addresses
the insufficient dataset problem in the medical domain. In fact, dense prediction
tasks with end-to-end CNNs can implicitly gather many training data (one for each
pixel). That is one of the reasons that some large architectures like U-net [171]
can be trained from scratch using only 30 images. However, we believe transfer
learning will give further improvement, with careful consideration of the usage
of shallower layers and deeper layers. Shallower layers capture fine edge infor-
mation which are shared between natural images and medical image, while the
deeper layers capture content information which are completely difficult. There-
fore, the appropriate usage of feature maps of earlier layers is important (which
also recalls the problem of multi-scaling), for example, extra links to combine
shallower layers and deeper layers [145].
3) Discontinuity of broken edges Although the CNN is powerful to detect
edges. The severe and common touching and overlapping phenomenon between
objects in medical images are still challenging. One common way is to deploy a
remedy process on CNN outputs as discussed above, by integrating conventional
methods [121] or extra deep learning models attempting to reconstruct a better
contour map [198]. RNN has shown the potential to achieve contour completion
[227] with its ability to capture long-term dependence of inputs. However, the
semantic information of edges is very limited. To enrich the features of edge as
the input of RNN, better usage of feature maps would be helpful. In addition,
instead of conventional RNNs, advanced memory networks [199, 66] could be
33
useful to handle contour reasoning. In addition, using shape priors [219] is popu-
lar to main the structure of objects in medical image segmentation because organs
or cells usually have similar shapes. [26, 51] use deep Boltzmann machines to
model hierarchical structures to constrain the evolution of the shape-driven vari-
ational models. [175] considers using CNNs to achieve a similar task. However,
we haven’t seen studied to incorporate shape priors into CNN training. We think
there are several direction can be considered. The first is adding shape prior con-
straints in the final loss layer. The second is formulating other structured outputs
to maintain the shape and continuity of predicted contours, such as [174, 146].
4) Miscellaneous Collecting large-scale medical image dataset is extremely
difficult. Exploring using less-labeled training data is essential. [92, 112] have
show ways of using CNN on natural images and show promising results. However,
the study on medical images is not seen. Low-quality or high SNR images are also
common in medical images. Specific methods to resist such situation is necessary
[152].
8. Conclusion
This paper discusses the key components and technical ingredients of CNNs
specific to medical image contour detection. Specifically, we review several main-
stream CNN architectures and clarify how these approaches overcome the difficul-
ties of CNN training and promote the CNN development. The advantages and dis-
advantages are analyzed in details. We believe those details are important for the
research of CNN based image contour detection. Next, we discuss several state-
of-the-art methods for image contour detection using CNNs with comprehensive
analysis and discussions, with the goal to show the problems current state-of-the-
art methods are trying to solve. We discuss the challenges and significance of
contour detection in medical images and review the historical approaches to solve
these problems. Then we review the CNN based medical image contour detection
and segmentation methods that leverage on recent advances in CNNs for contour
detection and segmentation. Finally, we discuss the problems of existing methods
and point out potential directions.
This paper attempts to cover necessary technical ingredients of state-of-the-
art CNNs and connect their applications in the medical image domain. Compared
with the various methods in the computer vision community, we point out the cur-
rent diversity deficiency in the medical image contour detection and segmentation
and provide potential directions and technical suggestions.
34
References
References
[1] Al-Kofahi, Y., Lassoued, W., Lee, W., Roysam, B., April 2010. Improved
automatic detection and segmentation of cell nuclei in histopathology im-
ages. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering 57 (4), 841–852.
[2] Ali, S., Madabhushi, A., 2012. An integrated region-, boundary-, shape-
based active contour for multiple object overlap resolution in histological
imagery. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 31 (7), 1448–1460.
[3] Alvarez, J. M., LeCun, Y., Gevers, T., Lopez, A. M., 2012. Semantic road
segmentation via multi-scale ensembles of learned features. In: European
Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 586–595.
[4] Arbelaez, P., Maire, M., Fowlkes, C., Malik, J., 2009. From contours to
regions: An empirical evaluation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 2294–2301.
[5] Arbelaez, P., Maire, M., Fowlkes, C., Malik, J., 2011. Contour detection
and hierarchical image segmentation. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Anal-
ysis and Machine Intelligence 33 (5), 898–916.
[6] Arbelaez, P., Pont-Tuset, J., Barron, J., Marques, F., Malik, J., 2014. Multi-
scale combinatorial grouping. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 328–335.
[7] Arganda-Carreras, I., Turaga, S. C., Berger, D. R., Cires?an, D., Giusti, A.,
Gambardella, L. M., Schmidhuber, J., Laptev, D., Dwivedi, S., Buhmann,
J. M., et al., 2015. Crowdsourcing the creation of image segmentation al-
gorithms for connectomics. Frontiers in neuroanatomy 9.
[8] Bansal, A., Chen, X., Russell, B., Gupta, A., Ramanan, D., 2016.
Pixelnet: Towards a General Pixel-level Architecture. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1609.06694.
[9] Bengio, Y., Courville, A., Vincent, P., 2013. Representation learning: A
review and new perspectives. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence 35 (8), 1798–1828.
35
[10] BenTaieb, A., Hamarneh, G., 2016. Topology aware fully convolutional
networks for histology gland segmentation. In: International Conference on
Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention. Springer,
pp. 460–468.
[11] Bernardis, E., Yu, S. X., 2010. Finding dots: segmentation as popping out
regions from boundaries. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 199–206.
[12] Bertasius, G., Shi, J., Torresani, L., 2015. Deepedge: A multi-scale bifur-
cated deep network for top-down contour detection. In: Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 4380–
4389.
[13] Bertasius, G., Shi, J., Torresani, L., 2015. Deepedge: A multi-scale bifur-
cated deep network for top-down contour detection. In: Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 4380–
4389.
[14] Bertasius, G., Shi, J., Torresani, L., 2015. High-for-low and low-for-high:
Efficient boundary detection from deep object features and its applications
to high-level vision. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference
on Computer Vision. pp. 504–512.
[15] Bottou, L., 2010. Large-scale machine learning with stochastic gradient
descent. In: Proceedings of COMPSTAT. pp. 177–186.
[16] Boykov, Y., Kolmogorov, V., 2004. An experimental comparison of min-
cut/max- flow algorithms for energy minimization in vision. IEEE Trans-
actions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 26 (9), 1124–1137.
[17] Boykov, Y., Veksler, O., Zabih, R., 2001. Fast approximate energy mini-
mization via graph cuts. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Ma-
chine Intelligence 23 (11), 1222–1239.
[18] Cai, J., Lu, L., Xie, Y., Xing, F., Yang, L., 2017. Improving deep pancreas
segmentation in ct and mri images via recurrent neural contextual learn-
ing and direct loss function. International Conference on Medical Image
Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention.
36
[19] Cai, J., Lu, L., Zhang, Z., Xing, F., Yang, L., Yin, Q., 2016. Pancreas seg-
mentation in mri using graph-based decision fusion on convolutional neural
networks. In: International Conference on Medical Image Computing and
Computer-Assisted Intervention. pp. 442–450.
[20] Cai, Z., Fan, Q., Feris, R. S., Vasconcelos, N., 2016. A unified multi-scale
deep convolutional neural network for fast object detection. In: European
Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 354–370.
[21] Canny, J., 1986. A computational approach to edge detection. IEEE Trans-
actions on pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (6), 679–698.
[22] Caselles, V., Kimmel, R., Sapiro, G., 1997. Geodesic active contours. In-
ternational Journal of Computer Vision 22 (1), 61–79.
[23] Chan, T. F., Vese, L. A., 2001. Active contours without edges. IEEE Trans-
actions on Image Processing 10 (2), 266–277.
[24] Chang, H., Han, J., Borowsky, A., Loss, L., Gray, J., Spellman, P., Parvin,
B., 2013. Invariant delineation of nuclear architecture in glioblastoma mul-
tiforme for clinical and molecular association. IEEE Transactions on Med-
ical Imaging 32 (4), 670–682.
[25] Chatfield, K., Simonyan, K., Vedaldi, A., Zisserman, A., 2014. Return of
the devil in the details: Delving deep into convolutional nets. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1405.3531.
[26] Chen, F., Yu, H., Hu, R., Zeng, X., 2013. Deep learning shape priors for
object segmentation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 1870–1877.
[27] Chen, H., Qi, X., Yu, L., Dou, Q., Qin, J., Heng, P.-A., 2017. Dcan: Deep
contour-aware networks for object instance segmentation from histology
images. Medical Image Analysis 36, 135–146.
[28] Chen, H., Qi, X., Yu, L., Heng, P.-A., 2016. Dcan: Deep contour-aware
networks for accurate gland segmentation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 2487–2496.
[29] Chen, H., Qi, X. J., Cheng, J. Z., Heng, P. A., 2016. Deep contextual net-
works for neuronal structure segmentation. In: Thirtieth AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence.
37
[30] Chen, J., Yang, L., Zhang, Y., Alber, M., Chen, D. Z., 2016. Combining
fully convolutional and recurrent neural networks for 3d biomedical image
segmentation. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. pp.
3036–3044.
[31] Chen, L.-C., Papandreou, G., Kokkinos, I., Murphy, K., Yuille, A. L., 2014.
Semantic image segmentation with deep convolutional nets and fully con-
nected crfs. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.7062.
[32] Chen, X., Zhou, X., Wong, S. T. C., April 2006. Automated segmentation,
classification, and tracking of cancer cell nuclei in time-lapse microscopy.
IEEE Transaction Biomedical Engineering 53 (4), 762–766.
[33] C?ic?ek, O?., Abdulkadir, A., Lienkamp, S. S., Brox, T., Ronneberger, O.,
2016. 3d u-net: learning dense volumetric segmentation from sparse an-
notation. In: International Conference on Medical Image Computing and
Computer-Assisted Intervention. pp. 424–432.
[34] Ciresan, D., Giusti, A., Gambardella, L. M., Schmidhuber, J., 2012. Deep
neural networks segment neuronal membranes in electron microscopy im-
ages. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. pp. 2843–
2851.
[35] Clevert, D.-A., Unterthiner, T., Hochreiter, S., 2015. Fast and accurate
deep network learning by exponential linear units (elus). arXiv preprint
arXiv:1511.07289.
[36] Comaniciu, D., Meer, P., 2002. Mean shift: A robust approach toward fea-
ture space analysis. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence 24 (5), 603–619.
[37] Cortes, C., Vapnik, V., 1995. Support-vector networks. Machine learning
20 (3), 273–297.
[38] Cour, T., Benezit, F., Shi, J., 2005. Spectral segmentation with multiscale
graph decomposition. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition. Vol. 2. pp. 1124–1131.
[39] Cremers, D., Rousson, M., Deriche, R., 2007. A review of statistical ap-
proaches to level set segmentation: integrating color, texture, motion and
shape. International Journal of Computer Vision 72 (2), 195–215.
38
[40] Dai, J., He, K., Sun, J., 2015. Boxsup: Exploiting bounding boxes to super-
vise convolutional networks for semantic segmentation. In: Proceedings of
the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 1635–1643.
[41] Dai, W., Doyle, J., Liang, X., Zhang, H., Dong, N., Li, Y., Xing, E. P.,
2017. Scan: Structure correcting adversarial network for chest x-rays organ
segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.08770.
[42] Delgado-Gonzalo, R., Uhlmann, V., Schmitter, D., Unser, M., 2015. Snakes
on a plane: a perfect snap for bioimage analysis. IEEE Signal Processing
Magazine 32 (1), 41–48.
[43] Dollar, P., Tu, Z., Belongie, S., 2006. Supervised learning of edges and
object boundaries. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition. Vol. 2. pp. 1964–1971.
[44] Dolla?r, P., Zitnick, C. L., 2013. Structured forests for fast edge detection.
In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision.
pp. 1841–1848.
[45] Dolla?r, P., Zitnick, C. L., 2015. Fast edge detection using structured forests.
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 37 (8),
1558–1570.
[46] Dou, Q., Chen, H., Jin, Y., Yu, L., Qin, J., Heng, P.-A., 2016. 3d deeply
supervised network for automatic liver segmentation from ct volumes. In:
International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-
Assisted Intervention. pp. 149–157.
[47] Drozdzal, M., Vorontsov, E., Chartrand, G., Kadoury, S., Pal, C., 2016.
The importance of skip connections in biomedical image segmentation. In:
International Workshop on Large-Scale Annotation of Biomedical Data and
Expert Label Synthesis. pp. 179–187.
[48] Duchi, J., Hazan, E., Singer, Y., 2011. Adaptive subgradient methods for
online learning and stochastic optimization. Journal of Machine Learning
Research 12, 2121–2159.
[49] Duhamel, J.-R., Bremmer, F., BenHamed, S., Graf, W., 1997. Spatial
invariance of visual receptive fields in parietal cortex neurons. Nature
389 (6653), 845–848.
39
[50] El-Baz, A., Beache, G. M., Gimel’farb, G., Suzuki, K., Okada, K., El-
nakib, A., Soliman, A., Abdollahi, B., 2013. Computer-aided diagnosis
systems for lung cancer: challenges and methodologies. International jour-
nal of biomedical imaging 2013.
[51] Eslami, S. A., Heess, N., Williams, C. K., Winn, J., 2014. The shape boltz-
mann machine: a strong model of object shape. International Journal of
Computer Vision 107 (2), 155–176.
[52] Fakhry, A., Peng, H., Ji, S., 2016. Deep models for brain em image segmen-
tation: novel insights and improved performance. Bioinformatics, 2352–
2358.
[53] Felzenszwalb, P. F., Huttenlocher, D. P., 2004. Efficient graph-based image
segmentation. IJCV 59 (2), 167–181.
[54] Freeman, W. T., Adelson, E. H., 1991. The design and use of steerable fil-
ters. IEEE Transactions on Pattern analysis and machine intelligence 13 (9),
891–906.
[55] Fu, H., Wang, C., Tao, D., Black, M., 2016. Occlusion boundary detection
via deep exploration of context. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 234–241.
[56] Ganin, Y., Lempitsky, V., 2014. Nˆ 4-fields: Neural network nearest neigh-
bor fields for image transforms. In: Asian Conference on Computer Vision.
pp. 536–551.
[57] Girshick, R., Donahue, J., Darrell, T., Malik, J., 2014. Rich feature hierar-
chies for accurate object detection and semantic segmentation. In: Proceed-
ings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
pp. 580–587.
[58] Glorot, X., Bengio, Y., 2010. Understanding the difficulty of training deep
feedforward neural networks. In: Artificial Intelligence and Statistics Con-
ference. Vol. 9. pp. 249–256.
[59] Glorot, X., Bordes, A., Bengio, Y., 2011. Deep sparse rectifier neural net-
works. In: Artificial Intelligence and Statistics Conference. Vol. 15. p. 275.
40
[60] Gonzalez, R. C., Woods, R. E., 2008. Digital image processing. Pearson
Education, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA.
[61] Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y., Courville, A., 2016. Deep Learning. MIT Press,
http://www.deeplearningbook.org.
[62] Goodfellow, I., Pouget-Abadie, J., Mirza, M., Xu, B., Warde-Farley, D.,
Ozair, S., Courville, A., Bengio, Y., 2014. Generative adversarial nets. In:
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. pp. 2672–2680.
[63] Goodfellow, I. J., Warde-Farley, D., Mirza, M., Courville, A. C., Bengio,
Y., 2013. Maxout networks. International Conference on Machine Learning
28, 1319–1327.
[64] Grady, L., 2006. Random walks for image segmentation. IEEE Transac-
tions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 28 (11), 1768–1783.
[65] Grady, L., Schwartz, E. L., 2006. Isoperimetric graph partitioning for im-
age segmetentation. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence 28 (1), 469–475.
[66] Graves, A., Wayne, G., Reynolds, M., Harley, T., Danihelka, I., Grabska-
Barwin?ska, A., Colmenarejo, S. G., Grefenstette, E., Ramalho, T., Agapiou,
J., et al., 2016. Hybrid computing using a neural network with dynamic
external memory. Nature 538 (7626), 471–476.
[67] Greenspan, H., van Ginneken, B., Summers, R. M., 2016. Guest edito-
rial deep learning in medical imaging: Overview and future promise of
an exciting new technique. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 35 (5),
1153–1159.
[68] Gu, J., Wang, Z., Kuen, J., Ma, L., Shahroudy, A., Shuai, B., Liu, T., Wang,
X., Wang, G., 2015. Recent advances in convolutional neural networks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.07108.
[69] Hajjar, A., Chen, T., 1997. A new real time edge linking algorithm and its
vlsi implementation. In: Computer Architecture for Machine Perception,
1997. CAMP 97. Proceedings. 1997 Fourth IEEE International Workshop
on. pp. 280–284.
41
[70] Hariharan, B., Arbela?ez, P., Girshick, R., Malik, J., 2015. Hypercolumns
for object segmentation and fine-grained localization. In: Proceedings of
the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp.
447–456.
[71] He, K., Sun, J., 2015. Convolutional neural networks at constrained time
cost. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition. pp. 5353–5360.
[72] He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., Sun, J., 2015. Delving deep into rectifiers:
Surpassing human-level performance on imagenet classification. In: Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision. pp.
1026–1034.
[73] He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., Sun, J., 2016. Deep residual learning for image
recognition. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition. pp. 770–778.
[74] He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., Sun, J., 2016. Identity mappings in deep resid-
ual networks. In: European Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 630–645.
[75] Hinton, G., 2011. Deep belief nets. In: Encyclopedia of Machine Learning.
Springer, pp. 267–269.
[76] Hinton, G., Srivastava, N., Swersky, K., 2012. Neural networks for machine
learning lecture 6a overview of mini–batch gradient descent.
[77] Hinton, G. E., Salakhutdinov, R. R., 2006. Reducing the dimensionality of
data with neural networks. Science 313 (5786), 504–507.
[78] Hinton, G. E., Zemel, R. S., 1994. Autoencoders, minimum description
length and helmholtz free energy. In: Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems. pp. 3–10.
[79] Hong, S., Noh, H., Han, B., 2015. Decoupled deep neural network for
semi-supervised semantic segmentation. In: Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems. pp. 1495–1503.
[80] Hong, S., Oh, J., Lee, H., Han, B., 2016. Learning transferrable knowl-
edge for semantic segmentation with deep convolutional neural network.
In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition. pp. 3204–3212.
42
[81] Hsieh, P.-J., Vul, E., Kanwisher, N., 2010. Recognition alters the spatial
pattern of fmri activation in early retinotopic cortex. Journal of neurophys-
iology 103 (3), 1501–1507.
[82] Huang, G., Liu, Z., Weinberger, K. Q., 2017. Densely connected convolu-
tional networks. Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition.
[83] Huang, G., Sun, Y., Liu, Z., Sedra, D., Weinberger, K. Q., 2016. Deep net-
works with stochastic depth. In: European Conference on Computer Vision.
pp. 646–661.
[84] Hwang, J.-J., Liu, T.-L., 2015. Pixel-wise deep learning for contour detec-
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1504.01989.
[85] Ioffe, S., Szegedy, C., 2015. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep
network training by reducing internal covariate shift. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1502.03167.
[86] Isola, P., Zoran, D., Krishnan, D., Adelson, E. H., 2014. Crisp boundary
detection using pointwise mutual information. In: European Conference
on Computer Vision. pp. 799–814.
[87] Jaderberg, M., Simonyan, K., Zisserman, A., et al., 2015. Spatial trans-
former networks. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
pp. 2017–2025.
[88] Janssens, T., Antanas, L., Derde, S., Vanhorebeek, I., den Berghe, G. V.,
Grandas, F. G., December 2013. Charisma: an integrated approach to au-
tomatic h&e-stained skeletal muscle cell segmentation using supervised
learning and novel robust clump splitting. Medical Image Analysis 17 (8),
1206–1219.
[89] Jiang, J., Trundle, P., Ren, J., 2010. Medical image analysis with artifi-
cial neural networks. Computerized Medical Imaging and Graphics 34 (8),
617–631.
[90] Kallenberg, M., Petersen, K., Nielsen, M., Ng, A. Y., Diao, P., Igel, C., Va-
chon, C. M., Holland, K., Winkel, R. R., Karssemeijer, N., et al., 2016. Un-
supervised deep learning applied to breast density segmentation and mam-
mographic risk scoring. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 35 (5),
1322–1331.
43
[91] Kass, M., Witkin, A., Terzopoulos, D., 1988. Snakes: Active contour mod-
els. International Journal of Computer Vision 1 (4), 321–331.
[92] Khoreva, A., Benenson, R., Omran, M., Hein, M., Schiele, B., 2016.
Weakly supervised object boundaries. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 183–192.
[93] Kim, J., Kwon Lee, J., Mu Lee, K., 2016. Accurate image super-resolution
using very deep convolutional networks. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 1646–1654.
[94] Kim, T. H., Lee, K. M., Lee, S. U., 2013. Learning full pairwise affini-
ties for spectral segmentation. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence 35 (7), 1690–1703.
[95] Kingma, D., Ba, J., 2014. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980.
[96] Kivinen, J. J., Williams, C. K., Heess, N., Technologies, D., 2014. Visual
boundary prediction: A deep neural prediction network and quality dissec-
tion. In: Artificial Intelligence and Statistics Conference. Vol. 1. p. 9.
[97] Kokkinos, I., 2015. Pushing the boundaries of boundary detection using
deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.07386.
[98] Kong, H., Gurcan, M., Belkacem-Boussaid, K., 2011. Partitioning
histopathological images: an integrated framework for supervised color-
texture segmentation and cell splitting. IEEE Transactions on Medical
Imaging 30 (9), 1661–1677.
[99] Konishi, S., Yuille, A. L., Coughlan, J. M., Zhu, S. C., 2003. Statistical
edge detection: Learning and evaluating edge cues. IEEE Transactions on
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 25 (1), 57–74.
[100] Kontschieder, P., Bulo, S. R., Bischof, H., Pelillo, M., 2011. Structured
class-labels in random forests for semantic image labelling. In: Proceedings
of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 2190–2197.
[101] Kourtzi, Z., Kanwisher, N., 2001. Representation of perceived object shape
by the human lateral occipital complex. Science 293 (5534), 1506–1509.
44
[102] Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., Hinton, G. E., 2012. Imagenet classification
with deep convolutional neural networks. In: Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems. pp. 1097–1105.
[103] LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y., Hinton, G., 2015. Deep learning. Nature 521 (7553),
436–444.
[104] LeCun, Y., Boser, B., Denker, J. S., Henderson, D., Howard, R. E., Hub-
bard, W., Jackel, L. D., 1989. Backpropagation applied to handwritten zip
code recognition. Neural computation 1 (4), 541–551.
[105] LeCun, Y. A., Bottou, L., Orr, G. B., Mu?ller, K.-R., 2012. Efficient back-
prop. In: Neural networks: Tricks of the trade. pp. 9–48.
[106] Lee, C.-Y., Xie, S., Gallagher, P., Zhang, Z., Tu, Z., 2015. Deeply-
supervised nets. In: Artificial Intelligence and Statistics Conference. pp.
562–570.
[107] Lee, H., Grosse, R., Ranganath, R., Ng, A. Y., 2009. Convolutional deep
belief networks for scalable unsupervised learning of hierarchical repre-
sentations. In: Proceedings of the 26th annual international conference on
machine learning. pp. 609–616.
[108] Lee, H., Pham, P., Largman, Y., Ng, A. Y., 2009. Unsupervised feature
learning for audio classification using convolutional deep belief networks.
In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. pp. 1096–1104.
[109] Levinshtein, A., Sminchisescu, C., Dickinson, S., 2010. Optimal contour
closure by superpixel grouping. In: European Conference on Computer
Vision. pp. 480–493.
[110] Li, C., Wand, M., 2016. Combining markov random fields and convolu-
tional neural networks for image synthesis. In: Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 2479–2486.
[111] Li, K., Miller, E. D., Chen, M., Kanade, T., Weiss, L. E., Campbell, P. G.,
2008. Cell population tracking and lineage construction with spatiotempo-
ral context. Medical Image Analysis 12 (5), 546–566.
[112] Li, Y., Paluri, M., Rehg, J. M., Dolla?r, P., 2016. Unsupervised learning of
edges. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition. pp. 1619–1627.
45
[113] Liaw, A., Wiener, M., 2002. Classification and regression by random forest.
R news 2 (3), 18–22.
[114] Lim, J. J., Zitnick, C. L., Dolla?r, P., 2013. Sketch tokens: A learned mid-
level representation for contour and object detection. In: Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 3158–
3165.
[115] Lin, G., Chawla, M. K., Olson, K., Guzowski, J. F., Barnes, C. A., Roysam,
B., 2005. Hierarchical, model-based merging of multiple fragments for im-
proved three-dimensional segmentation of nuclei. Cytometry A 63 (1), 20–
33.
[116] Lin, G., Shen, C., Reid, I., van den Hengel, A., 2015. Deeply learning the
messages in message passing inference. In: Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems. pp. 361–369.
[117] Lin, G., Shen, C., van den Hengel, A., Reid, I., 2016. Efficient piecewise
training of deep structured models for semantic segmentation. In: Proceed-
ings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
pp. 3194–3203.
[118] Lin, M., Chen, Q., Yan, S., 2014. Network in network. International Con-
ference on Learning Representations.
[119] Liu, F., Lin, G., Shen, C., 2015. Crf learning with cnn features for image
segmentation. Pattern Recognition 48 (10), 2983–2992.
[120] Liu, F., Xing, F., Su, H., Yang, L., 2014. Touching adipocyte cells de-
composition using combinatorial optimization. In: IEEE 11th International
Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI). pp. 1340–1347.
[121] Liu, F., Xing, F., Zhang, Z., Mcgough, M., Yang, L., 2015. Robust mus-
cle cell quantification using structured edge detection and hierarchical seg-
mentation. In: International Conference on Medical Image Computing and
Computer-Assisted Intervention. pp. 324–331.
[122] Liu, W., Anguelov, D., Erhan, D., Szegedy, C., Reed, S., 2015. Ssd: Single
shot multibox detector. pp. 21–37.
46
[123] Liu, Y., Cheng, M.-m., Hu, X., Wang, K., Bai, X., 2016. Learning relaxed
deep supervision for better edge detection. Proceedings of the IEEE Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
[124] Liu, Y., Cheng, M.-M., Hu, X., Wang, K., Bai, X., 2017. Richer convolu-
tional features for edge detection. Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
[125] Liu, Z., Li, X., Luo, P., Loy, C.-C., Tang, X., 2015. Semantic image seg-
mentation via deep parsing network. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 1377–1385.
[126] Long, J., Shelhamer, E., Darrell, T., 2015. Fully convolutional networks
for semantic segmentation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 3431–3440.
[127] Lu, J., Xiong, C., Parikh, D., Socher, R., 2016. Knowing when to look:
Adaptive attention via a visual sentinel for image captioning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1612.01887.
[128] Ma, W.-Y., Manjunath, B. S., 2000. Edgeflow: a technique for boundary
detection and image segmentation. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing
9 (8), 1375–1388.
[129] Maas, A. L., Hannun, A. Y., Ng, A. Y., 2013. Rectifier nonlinearities im-
prove neural network acoustic models. In: International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning. Vol. 30.
[130] Madabhushi, A., Lee, G., 2016. Image analysis and machine learning in
digital pathology: Challenges and opportunities.
[131] Mahendran, A., Vedaldi, A., 2015. Understanding deep image representa-
tions by inverting them. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 5188–5196.
[132] Mairal, J., Leordeanu, M., Bach, F., Hebert, M., Ponce, J., 2008. Discrim-
inative sparse image models for class-specific edge detection and image
interpretation. In: European Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 43–56.
[133] Maire, M., Arbela?ez, P., Fowlkes, C., Malik, J., 2008. Using contours to
detect and localize junctions in natural images. In: Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 1–8.
47
[134] Maire, M., Narihira, T., Yu, S. X., 2016. Affinity cnn: Learning pixel-
centric pairwise relations for figure/ground embedding. In: Proceedings
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp.
174–182.
[135] Maire, M., Stella, X. Y., Perona, P., 2014. Reconstructive sparse code trans-
fer for contour detection and semantic labeling. In: Asian Conference on
Computer Vision. pp. 273–287.
[136] Maire, M. R., 2009. Contour detection and image segmentation. Ph.D. the-
sis, Citeseer.
[137] Malik, J., Belongie, S., Leung, T., Shi, J., 2001. Contour and texture
analysis for image segmentation. International Journal of Computer Vision
43 (1), 7–27.
[138] Maninis, K.-K., Pont-Tuset, J., Arbela?ez, P., Van Gool, L., 2016. Convolu-
tional oriented boundaries. In: European Conference on Computer Vision.
pp. 580–596.
[139] Maninis, K.-K., Pont-Tuset, J., Arbela?ez, P., Van Gool, L., 2016. Deep reti-
nal image understanding. In: International Conference on Medical Image
Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention. pp. 140–148.
[140] Marr, D., Hildreth, E., 1980. Theory of edge detection. Proceedings of the
Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences 207 (1167), 187–217.
[141] Martin, D. R., Fowlkes, C. C., Malik, J., 2004. Learning to detect natu-
ral image boundaries using local brightness, color, and texture cues. IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 26 (5), 530–
549.
[142] Meer, P., Georgescu, B., 2001. Edge detection with embedded confidence.
IEEE Transactions on pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 23 (12),
1351–1365.
[143] Meijering, E., 2012. Cell segmentation: 50 years down the road. IEEE Sig-
nal Processing Magazine 29 (5), 140–145.
[144] Milletari, F., Ahmadi, S.-A., Kroll, C., Plate, A., Rozanski, V., Maiostre, J.,
Levin, J., Dietrich, O., Ertl-Wagner, B., Bo?tzel, K., et al., 2017. Hough-cnn:
48
Deep learning for segmentation of deep brain regions in mri and ultrasound.
Computer Vision and Image Understanding.
[145] Milletari, F., Navab, N., Ahmadi, S.-A., 2016. V-net: Fully convolutional
neural networks for volumetric medical image segmentation. In: 3D Vision
(3DV), 2016 Fourth International Conference on. pp. 565–571.
[146] Mo, Y., Liu, F., Zhang, J., Yang, G., He, T., Guo, Y., 2017.
Deep poincare? map for robust medical image segmentation. In:
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1703.09200.pdf.
[147] Morrone, M. C., Owens, R. A., 1987. Feature detection from local energy.
Pattern recognition letters 6 (5), 303–313.
[148] Myers, A., Teo, C. L., Fermu?ller, C., Aloimonos, Y., 2015. Affordance de-
tection of tool parts from geometric features. In: International Conference
on Robotics and Automation.
[149] Nair, V., Hinton, G. E., 2010. Rectified linear units improve restricted boltz-
mann machines. In: Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on
Machine Learning. pp. 807–814.
[150] Nogues, I., Lu, L., Wang, X., Roth, H., Bertasius, G., Lay, N., Shi, J., Tse-
hay, Y., Summers, R. M., 2016. Automatic lymph node cluster segmenta-
tion using holistically-nested neural networks and structured optimization
in ct images. In: International Conference on Medical Image Computing
and Computer-Assisted Intervention. pp. 388–397.
[151] Noh, H., Hong, S., Han, B., 2015. Learning deconvolution network for se-
mantic segmentation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference
on Computer Vision. pp. 1520–1528.
[152] Ofir, N., Galun, M., Nadler, B., Basri, R., 2016. Fast detection of curved
edges at low snr. Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition.
[153] Oktay, O., Ferrante, E., Kamnitsas, K., Heinrich, M., Bai, W., Caballero, J.,
Guerrero, R., Cook, S., de Marvao, A., O’Regan, D., et al., 2017. Anatom-
ically constrained neural networks (acnn): Application to cardiac image
enhancement and segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.08302.
49
[154] Oquab, M., Bottou, L., Laptev, I., Sivic, J., 2014. Learning and transfer-
ring mid-level image representations using convolutional neural networks.
In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition. pp. 1717–1724.
[155] Papandreou, G., Chen, L.-C., Murphy, K., Yuille, A. L., 2015. Weakly-
and semi-supervised learning of a dcnn for semantic image segmentation.
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision.
[156] Papari, G., Petkov, N., 2011. Edge and line oriented contour detection:
State of the art. Image and Vision Computing 29 (2), 79–103.
[157] Pascanu, R., Mikolov, T., Bengio, Y., 2013. On the difficulty of training
recurrent neural networks. ICML (3) 28, 1310–1318.
[158] Paszke, A., Chaurasia, A., Kim, S., Culurciello, E., 2016. Enet: A deep
neural network architecture for real-time semantic segmentation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1606.02147.
[159] Pathak, D., Shelhamer, E., Long, J., Darrell, T., 2014. Fully convolutional
multi-class multiple instance learning. International Conference on Learn-
ing Representations.
[160] Perona, P., Malik, J., 1990. Detecting and localizing edges composed of
steps, peaks and roofs. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Confer-
ence on Computer Vision. pp. 52–57.
[161] Perona, P., Malik, J., 1990. Scale-space and edge detection using
anisotropic diffusion. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence 12 (7), 629–639.
[162] Pinheiro, P. O., Collobert, R., Dollar, P., 2015. Learning to segment object
candidates. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. pp.
1990–1998.
[163] Raiko, T., Valpola, H., LeCun, Y., 2012. Deep learning made easier by lin-
ear transformations in perceptrons. In: Artificial Intelligence and Statistics
Conference. Vol. 22. pp. 924–932.
[164] Rastegari, M., Ordonez, V., Redmon, J., Farhadi, A., 2016. Xnor-net:
Imagenet classification using binary convolutional neural networks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1603.05279.
50
[165] Ren, S., He, K., Girshick, R., Sun, J., 2015. Faster r-cnn: Towards real-time
object detection with region proposal networks. In: Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems. pp. 91–99.
[166] Ren, X., 2008. Multi-scale improves boundary detection in natural images.
In: European Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 533–545.
[167] Ren, X., Fowlkes, C. C., Malik, J., 2005. Scale-invariant contour comple-
tion using conditional random fields. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Computer Vision. Vol. 2. pp. 1214–1221.
[168] Ren, X., Fowlkes, C. C., Malik, J., 2006. Figure/ground assignment in nat-
ural images. In: European Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 614–627.
[169] Ren, Z., Shakhnarovich, G., 2013. Image segmentation by cascaded region
agglomeration. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vi-
sion and Pattern Recognition. pp. 2011–2018.
[170] Roerdink, J. B., Meijster, A., 2000. The watershed transform: Definitions,
algorithms and parallelization strategies. Fundamenta informaticae 41 (1,
2), 187–228.
[171] Ronneberger, O., Fischer, P., Brox, T., 2015. U-net: Convolutional net-
works for biomedical image segmentation. In: International Conference on
Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention. pp. 234–
241.
[172] Roth, H. R., Lu, L., Farag, A., Sohn, A., Summers, R. M., 2016. Spatial
aggregation of holistically-nested networks for automated pancreas seg-
mentation. In: International Conference on Medical Image Computing and
Computer-Assisted Intervention. pp. 451–459.
[173] Roth, H. R., Lu, L., Liu, J., Yao, J., Seff, A., Cherry, K., Kim, L., Summers,
R. M., 2016. Improving computer-aided detection using convolutional neu-
ral networks and random view aggregation. IEEE Transactions on Medical
Imaging 35 (5), 1170–1181.
[174] Rupprecht, C., Huaroc, E., Baust, M., Navab, N., 2016. Deep active con-
tours. arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.05074.
51
[175] Safar, S., Yang, M. H., 2015. Learning shape priors for object segmentation
via neural networks. In: IEEE International Conference on Image Process-
ing. pp. 1835–1839.
[176] Salakhutdinov, R., Hinton, G. E., 2009. Deep boltzmann machines. In:
Proceedings of the International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
Statistics. Vol. 5. pp. 448–455.
[177] Salakhutdinov, R., Mnih, A., Hinton, G., 2007. Restricted boltzmann ma-
chines for collaborative filtering. In: Proceedings of the 24th international
conference on Machine learning. pp. 791–798.
[178] Sanguinetti, J. L., Allen, J. J., Peterson, M. A., 2013. The ground side of an
object perceived as shapeless yet processed for semantics. Psychological
Science.
[179] Schmidhuber, J., 2015. Deep learning in neural networks: An overview.
Neural Networks 61, 85–117.
[180] Schulz, H., Behnke, S., 2012. Learning object-class segmentation with con-
volutional neural networks. In: European Symposium on Artificial Neural
Networks.
[181] Shah, A., Kadam, E., Shah, H., Shinde, S., Shingade, S., 2016. Deep resid-
ual networks with exponential linear unit. In: Proceedings of the Third
International Symposium on Computer Vision and the Internet. ACM, pp.
59–65.
[182] Shapley, R., Tolhurst, D., 1973. Edge detectors in human vision. The Jour-
nal of physiology 229 (1), 165.
[183] Sharif Razavian, A., Azizpour, H., Sullivan, J., Carlsson, S., 2014. Cnn
features off-the-shelf: an astounding baseline for recognition. In: Proceed-
ings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Workshops. pp. 806–813.
[184] Sharma, A., Tuzel, O., Jacobs, D. W., 2015. Deep hierarchical parsing for
semantic segmentation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 530–538.
52
[185] Shelhamer, E., Long, J., Darrell, T., 2016. Fully convolutional networks
for semantic segmentation. In: IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence. Vol. 39. pp. 640–651.
[186] Shen, W., Wang, X., Wang, Y., Bai, X., Zhang, Z., 2015. Deepcontour:
A deep convolutional feature learned by positive-sharing loss for contour
detection. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition. pp. 3982–3991.
[187] Shen, W., Zhao, K., Jiang, Y., Wang, Y., Zhang, Z., Bai, X., 2016. Object
skeleton extraction in natural images by fusing scale-associated deep side
outputs. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition. pp. 222–230.
[188] Shi, J., Malik, J., 2000. Normalized cuts and image segmentation. IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 22 (8), 888–
905.
[189] Shin, H.-C., Roth, H. R., Gao, M., Lu, L., Xu, Z., Nogues, I., Yao, J.,
Mollura, D., Summers, R. M., 2016. Deep convolutional neural networks
for computer-aided detection: Cnn architectures, dataset characteristics and
transfer learning. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 35 (5), 1285–
1298.
[190] Shrivakshan, G., Chandrasekar, C., et al., 2012. A comparison of various
edge detection techniques used in image processing. IJCSI International
Journal of Computer Science Issues 9 (5), 272–276.
[191] Simonyan, K., Zisserman, A., 2014. Very deep convolutional networks for
large-scale image recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556.
[192] Singh, S., Hoiem, D., Forsyth, D., 2016. Swapout: Learning an ensem-
ble of deep architectures. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems. pp. 28–36.
[193] Sirinukunwattana, K., Pluim, J. P., Chen, H., Qi, X., Heng, P.-A., Guo,
Y. B., Wang, L. Y., Matuszewski, B. J., Bruni, E., Sanchez, U., et al., 2017.
Gland segmentation in colon histology images: The glas challenge contest.
Medical Image Analysis 35, 489–502.
53
[194] Song, Y., Zhang, L., Chen, S., Ni, D., Lei, B., Wang, T., 2015. Accurate
segmentation of cervical cytoplasm and nuclei based on multiscale convo-
lutional network and graph partitioning. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical
Engineering 62 (10), 2421–2433.
[195] Srivastava, N., Hinton, G. E., Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., Salakhutdinov,
R., 2014. Dropout: a simple way to prevent neural networks from overfit-
ting. Journal of Machine Learning Research 15 (1), 1929–1958.
[196] Srivastava, R. K., Greff, K., Schmidhuber, J., 2015. Highway networks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1505.00387.
[197] Stahl, J. S., Wang, S., 2008. Globally optimal grouping for symmetric
closed boundaries by combining boundary and region information. IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 30 (3), 395–
411.
[198] Su, H., Xing, F., Kong, X., Xie, Y., Zhang, S., Yang, L., 2015. Robust
cell detection and segmentation in histopathological images using sparse
reconstruction and stacked denoising autoencoders. In: International Con-
ference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention.
pp. 383–390.
[199] Sukhbaatar, S., Weston, J., Fergus, R., et al., 2015. End-to-end memory net-
works. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. pp. 2440–
2448.
[200] Sundberg, P., Brox, T., Maire, M., Arbela?ez, P., Malik, J., 2011. Occlu-
sion boundary detection and figure/ground assignment from optical flow.
In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition. pp. 2233–2240.
[201] Sutskever, I., Martens, J., Dahl, G. E., Hinton, G. E., 2013. On the impor-
tance of initialization and momentum in deep learning. International Con-
ference on Machine Learning 28, 1139–1147.
[202] Suzuki, K., Horiba, I., Sugie, N., 2003. Neural edge enhancer for super-
vised edge enhancement from noisy images. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence 25 (12), 1582–1596.
54
[203] Szegedy, C., Ioffe, S., Vanhoucke, V., 2016. Inception-v4, inception-
resnet and the impact of residual connections on learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1602.07261.
[204] Szegedy, C., Liu, W., Jia, Y., Sermanet, P., Reed, S., Anguelov, D., Erhan,
D., Vanhoucke, V., Rabinovich, A., 2015. Going deeper with convolutions.
In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition. pp. 1–9.
[205] Szegedy, C., Vanhoucke, V., Ioffe, S., Shlens, J., Wojna, Z., 2016. Rethink-
ing the inception architecture for computer vision. In: Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 2818–
2826.
[206] Tajbakhsh, N., Shin, J. Y., Gurudu, S. R., Hurst, R. T., Kendall, C. B.,
Gotway, M. B., Liang, J., 2016. Convolutional neural networks for medical
image analysis: Full training or fine tuning? IEEE Transactions on Medical
Imaging 35 (5), 1299–1312.
[207] Targ, S., Almeida, D., Lyman, K., 2016. Resnet in resnet: Generalizing
residual architectures. arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.08029.
[208] Taylor, C. J., 2013. Towards fast and accurate segmentation. In: Proceed-
ings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
pp. 1916–1922.
[209] Teikari, P., Santos, M., Poon, C., Hynynen, K., 2016. Deep learning con-
volutional networks for multiphoton microscopy vasculature segmentation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.02382.
[210] Teo, C. L., Fermu?ller, C., Aloimonos, Y., 2015. Fast 2d border ownership
assignment. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition. pp. 5117–5125.
[211] Uijlings, J. R., Ferrari, V., 2015. Situational object boundary detection.
In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition. pp. 4712–4721.
[212] Veit, A., Wilber, M. J., Belongie, S., 2016. Residual networks behave like
ensembles of relatively shallow networks. In: Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems. pp. 550–558.
55
[213] Wan, L., Zeiler, M., Zhang, S., Cun, Y. L., Fergus, R., 2013. Regulariza-
tion of neural networks using dropconnect. In: International Conference on
Machine Learning. pp. 1058–1066.
[214] Wang, S., Stahl, J. S., Bailey, A., Dropps, M., 2007. Global detection of
salient convex boundaries. International Journal of Computer Vision 71 (3),
337–359.
[215] Xiaofeng, R., Bo, L., 2012. Discriminatively trained sparse code gradients
for contour detection. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems. pp. 584–592.
[216] Xie, S., Girshick, R., Dolla?r, P., Tu, Z., He, K., 2017. Aggregated residual
transformations for deep neural networks. Proceedings of the IEEE Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
[217] Xie, S., Tu, Z., 2015. Holistically-nested edge detection. In: Proceedings
of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 1395–1403.
[218] Xie, Y., Xing, F., Kong, X., Su, H., Yang, L., 2015. Beyond classification:
structured regression for robust cell detection using convolutional neural
network. In: International Conference on Medical Image Computing and
Computer-Assisted Intervention. pp. 358–365.
[219] Xing, F., Shi, X., Zhang, Z., Cai, J., Xie, Y., Yang, L., 2016. Transfer
shape modeling towards high-throughput microscopy image segmentation.
In: International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-
Assisted Intervention. pp. 183–190.
[220] Xing, F., Su, H., Neltner, J., Yang, L., 2014. Automatic Ki-67 counting us-
ing robust cell detection and online dictionary learning. IEEE Transactions
on Biomedical Engineering 61 (3), 859–870.
[221] Xing, F., Xie, Y., Yang, L., February 2016. An automatic learning-based
framework for robust nucleus segmentation. IEEE Transactions on Medical
Imaging 35 (2), 550–566.
[222] Xing, F., Yang, L., 2016. Robust nucleus/cell detection and segmentation in
digital pathology and microscopy images: A comprehensive review. IEEE
reviews in biomedical engineering.
56
[223] Xu, C., Prince, J. L., 1998. Snakes, shapes, and gradient vector flow. IEEE
Transactions on Image Processing 7 (3), 359–369.
[224] Xu, Y., Li, Y., Liu, M., Wang, Y., Lai, M., Eric, I., Chang, C., 2016. Gland
instance segmentation by deep multichannel side supervision. In: Interna-
tional Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted
Intervention. pp. 496–504.
[225] Yang, J., Price, B., Cohen, S., Lee, H., Yang, M.-H., 2016. Object contour
detection with a fully convolutional encoder-decoder network. In: Proceed-
ings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
pp. 193–202.
[226] Yang, L., Qiu, Z., Greenaway, A. H., Lu, W., July 2012. A new framework
for particle detection in low-snr fluorescence live-cell images and its ap-
plication for improved particle tracking. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical
Engineering 59 (7), 2040–2050.
[227] Yang, X., Yu, L., Wu, L., Ni, D., Heng, P.-A., 2017. Shape completion with
recurrent memory.
[228] Yu, F., Koltun, V., 2016. Multi-scale context aggregation by dilated convo-
lutions. International Conference on Learning Representations.
[229] Yu, Y., Fang, C., Liao, Z., 2015. Piecewise flat embedding for image seg-
mentation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Com-
puter Vision. pp. 1368–1376.
[230] Zagoruyko, S., Komodakis, N., 2016. Wide residual networks. British Ma-
chine Vision Conference.
[231] Zeiler, M. D., Fergus, R., 2014. Visualizing and understanding convolu-
tional networks. In: European Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 818–
833.
[232] Zeiler, M. D., Krishnan, D., Taylor, G. W., Fergus, R., 2010. Deconvo-
lutional networks. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 2528–2535.
[233] Zhang, B., Zimmer, C., Olivo-Marin, J.-C., 2004. Tracking fluorescent cells
with coupled geometric active contours. In: Biomedical Imaging: Nano to
Macro, 2004. IEEE International Symposium on. pp. 476–479.
57
[234] Zhang, Z., Xing, F., Shi, X., Yang, L., 2016. Semicontour: A semi-
supervised learning approach for contour detection. In: Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 251–
259.
[235] Zheng, S., Jayasumana, S., Romera-Paredes, B., Vineet, V., Su, Z., Du,
D., Huang, C., Torr, P. H., 2015. Conditional random fields as recurrent
neural networks. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Computer Vision. pp. 1529–1537.
[236] Ziou, D., Tabbone, S., et al., 1998. Edge detection techniques-an overview.
Pattern Recognition and Image Analysis C/C of Raspoznavaniye Obrazov
I Analiz Izobrazhenii 8, 537–559.
58
