Multimedia Tools and Applications manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
Review on Computer Vision Techniques in Emergency Situations
Laura Lopez-Fuentes · Joost van de Weijer · Manuel Gonza?lez-Hidalgo · Harald
Skinnemoen · Andrew D. Bagdanov
Received: date / Accepted: date
Abstract In emergency situations, actions that save lives
and limit the impact of hazards are crucial. In order to act,
situational awareness is needed to decide what to do. Ge-
olocalized photos and video of the situations as they evolve
can be crucial in better understanding them and making de-
cisions faster. Cameras are almost everywhere these days,
either in terms of smartphones, installed CCTV cameras,
UAVs or others. However, this poses challenges in big data
and information overflow. Moreover, most of the time there
are no disasters at any given location, so humans aiming to
detect sudden situations may not be as alert as needed at any
point in time. Consequently, computer vision tools can be
This work was partially supported by the Spanish Grants TIN2016-
75404-P AEI/FEDER, UE, TIN2014-52072-P, TIN2013-42795-P and
the European Commission H2020 I-REACT project no. 700256.
Laura Lopez-Fuentes benefits from the NAERINGSPHD fellowship
of the Norwegian Research Council under the collaboration agreement
Ref.3114 with the UIB. We thank the NVIDIA Corporation for support
in the form of GPU hardware.
L. Lopez-Fuentes
TM-RCS Working Group, AnsuR Technologies AS, Fornebu. Norway.
University of the Balearic Islands, Dept of Mathematics and Computer
Science, Crta. Valldemossa, km 7.5, E-07122 Palma, Spain.
Computer Vision Center. Universitat Auto?noma de Barcelona. 08193-
Barcelona. Spain. E-mail: l.lopez@uib.es
J. van de Weijer
Computer Vision Center. Universitat Auto?noma de Barcelona. 08193-
Barcelona. Spain. E-mail: joost@cvc.uab.es
M. Gonza?lez-Hidalgo
University of the Balearic Islands, Dept of Mathematics and Computer
Science, Crta. Valldemossa, km 7.5, E-07122 Palma, Spain. E-mail:
manuel.gonzalez@uib.es
H. Skinnemoen
TM-RCS Working Group, AnsuR Technologies AS, Fornebu. Norway.
E-mail: harald@ansur.no
A. D. Bagdanov
University of Florence, DINFO, Via Santa Marta 3, 50139 Florence,
Italy. E-mail: andrew.bagdanov@unifi.it
an excellent decision support. The number of emergencies
where computer vision tools has been considered or used is
very wide, and there is a great overlap across related emer-
gency research. Researchers tend to focus on state-of-the-art
systems that cover the same emergency as they are studying,
obviating important research in other fields. In order to un-
veil this overlap, the survey is divided along four main axes:
the types of emergencies that have been studied in computer
vision, the objective that the algorithms can address, the type
of hardware needed and the algorithms used. Therefore, this
review provides a broad overview of the progress of com-
puter vision covering all sorts of emergencies.
Keywords Emergency management · computer vision ·
decision makers · situational awareness · critical situation
1 Introduction
Emergencies are a major cause of both human and economic
loss. They vary in scale and magnitude, from small traffic
accidents involving few people, to full-scale natural disas-
ters which can devastate countries and harm thousands of
people. Emergency management has become very important
to reduce the impact of emergencies. As a consequence, us-
ing modern technology to implement innovative solutions to
prevent, mitigate, and study emergencies is an active field of
research.
The presence of digital cameras has grown explosively
over the last two decades. Camera systems perform real-time
recording of visual information in hotspots where an acci-
dent or emergency is likely to occur. Examples of such sys-
tems are cameras on the road, national parks, inside banks,
shops, airports, metros, streets and swimming pools. In Fig-
ure 1 we give some examples of frames from videos that
could potentially be recorded by some of these monitoring
systems. It is estimated that as of 2014 there were over 245
ar
X
iv
:1
70
8.
07
45
5v
1 
 [
cs
.C
V
] 
 2
4 
A
ug
 2
01
7
2 Laura Lopez-Fuentes et al.
Fig. 1: Example frames from videos that could potentially be recorded to detect different emergencies: a factory being
monitored to for rapid fire detection [156], a street monitored to detect floods [16], a surveillance camera on a pool to detect
drowning persons, [26] and a vehicle with on board camera for driver assistance [69].
million active, operational and professionally installed video
cameras around the world [76]. Mounting these video cam-
eras has become very cheap but there are insufficient human
resources to observe their output. Therefore, most of the data
is being processed after an emergency has already occurred,
thus losing the benefit of having a real-time monitoring tool
in the first place.
The problem of real-time processing of the visual out-
put from monitoring systems in potential emergency scenar-
ios has become a hot topic in the field of computer vision.
As we will show in this review, computer vision techniques
have been used to assist in various stages of emergency man-
agement: from prevention, detection, assistance of the re-
sponse, to the understanding of emergencies. A myriad of
algorithms has been proposed to prevent events that could
evolve into disaster and emergency situations. Others have
focused on fast response after an emergency has already oc-
curred. Yet other algorithms focus on assisting during the
response to an emergency situation. Finally, several meth-
ods focus on improving our understanding of emergencies
with the aim of predicting the likelihood of an emergency or
dangerous situation occurring.
This review provides a broad overview of the progress of
computer vision covering all sorts of emergencies. The re-
view is organized in four main axes along which researchers
working on the topic of computer vision for emergency sit-
uations have organized their investigations. The first axis
relates to the type of emergency being addressed, and the
most important division along this axis is the distinction be-
tween natural and man-made emergencies. The second axis
determines the objective of a system: if it is going to de-
tect risk factors to prevent the emergency, help detecting the
emergency once it has occurred, provide information to help
emergency responders to react to the emergency, or model
the emergency to extract valuable information for the future.
The third axis determines where the visual sensors should
be placed, and also what type of sensors are most useful for
the task. The last axis determines which algorithms will be
used to assist in analyzing the data. This typically involves
a choice of computer vision algorithms combined with ma-
chine learning techniques.
When organizing emergency situations along these axes,
our review shows that there is significant overlap across emer-
gency research areas, especially in the sensory data and al-
gorithms used. For this reason this review is useful for re-
searchers in emergency topics, allowing them to more quickly
find relevant works. Furthermore, due to its general nature,
this article aims to increase the flow of ideas among the var-
ious emergency research fields.
Since it is such an active field of research, there are sev-
eral reviews on computer vision algorithms in emergency
situations. However these reviews focus on a single, spe-
cific topic. In the field of fire detection, a recent survey was
published summarizing the different computer vision algo-
rithms proposed in the literature to detect fire in video [25].
Also Gade et al. [50] published a survey on applications of
thermal cameras in which fire detection is also considered.
Another related research direction is human activity recog-
nition and detection of abnormal human actions. This field
has many applications to video surveillance, as shown in a
recent review on this topic [86]. Work in the area of hu-
man activity recognition has focused on the specific topic
of falling person detection. Mubashir et al. [50] describe the
three main approaches to falling person detection, one of
them being computer vision. Another important application
area of emergency management is traffic. The number of ve-
hicles on roads has significantly increased in recent years,
and simultaneously the number of traffic accidents has also
increased. Therefore a large number of road safety infras-
tructure and control systems have been developed. Three
main reviews have been recently published on the topic of
road vehicles monitoring and accident detection using com-
puter vision [20,85,92]. As discussed here, there are several
review papers about different specific emergency situations,
however there is no one work reviewing computer vision in
emergency situations considering many types of emergency
Review on Computer Vision Techniques in Emergency Situations 3
situations. By doing so, we aspire to draw a wider picture of
the field, and to promote cross-emergency dissemination of
research ideas.
Computer vision is just one of several scientific fields
which aims to improve emergency management. Before go-
ing into depth on computer vision techniques for emergency
management, we briefly provide some pointers to other re-
search fields for interested readers. Emergency management
is a hot topic in the field of Internet of Things (IoT) [108,
171]. The goal of the IoT is to create an environment in
which information from any object connected to the network
be efficiently shared with others in real-time. The authors of
[171] provide an excellent study on how IoT technology can
enhance emergence rescue operations. Robotics research is
another field which already is changing emergency manage-
ment. Robots are being studied for handling hazardous sit-
uations with radiation [120], for assisting crowd evacuation
[133], and for search and rescue operations [136]. Finally,
we mention reviews on human centered sensing for emer-
gency evacuation [126] and research on the impact of social
media on emergency management. The main advantage of
computer vision compared to these other research fields is
the omni-presence of cameras in modern society, both in the
public space and mobile phones of users. However, for some
problems computer vision might currently be still less accu-
rate than other techniques.
2 Organization of this Review
Before we enter into the organization of the review it is im-
portant to define what we consider as an emergency and,
therefore, what situations and events will be encompassed
in this definition. We consider as an emergency any sudden
or unexpected situation that meets at least one of the follow-
ing conditions:
– it is a situation that represents an imminent risk of health
or life to a person or group of persons or damage to prop-
erties or environment;
– it is a situation that has already caused loss of health or
life to a person or group of persons or damage to prop-
erties or environment; or
– it is a situation with high probability of scaling, putting
in risk the health or life of a person or group of persons
or damage to properties or environment.
An emergency situation, therefore, requires situational aware-
ness, rapid attention, and remedial action to prevent degra-
dation of the situation. In some cases emergency situations
can be prevented by avoiding and minimizing risks. Also,
in some situations, the occurrence of an emergency situ-
ation can help to understand risk factors and improve the
prevention mechanisms. Taking this definition in consider-
ation, any type of uncontrolled fire would be considered
as an emergency situation as it is an unexpected situation
that could represent a risk for persons, the environment, and
property. A controlled demolition of a building would not be
considered an emergency situation, as by definition if it is
controlled it is not an unexpected situation any more. How-
ever, if someone is injured or something unforeseen was
damaged during the demolition, that would then be consid-
ered an emergency situation.
After having defined what we consider an emergency
situation we briefly explain the organization of this review.
We begin in Section 3 with an overview and classification
into subcategories of emergency situations. Here, we briefly
introduce the three axes along which we will organize the
existing literature on computer vision for emergency situa-
tions, which corresponds to Sections 4 to 6. The organiza-
tion is also summarized in Figure 2.
The Monitoring Objective Axis (Section 4): the manage-
ment of an emergency has a life cycle which can be divided
into four main phases [121]:
– Preparedness: during this phase there are risk factors
that could trigger an emergency at some point. In order
to reduce the chance of an emergency happening, it is
important to estimate these factors and avoid or mini-
mize them as much as possible. Not all emergencies can
be prevented, but in some cases preventive measures can
help to reduce the impact of a disaster (like teaching peo-
ple how to behave during a hurricane).
– Response: response activities are performed after the
emergency has occurred. At this point, it is very impor-
tant to detect and localize the emergency and to maintain
situational awareness to have a rapid and efficient reac-
tion. Often the minutes immediately after the occurrence
of an emergency can be crucial to mitigating its effects.
– Recovery: recovery activities take place until normality
is recovered. In this phase actions must be taken to save
lives, prevent further damaging or escalation of the sit-
uation. We consider that normality has been recovered
when the immediate threat to health, life, properties or
environment has subsided.
– Mitigation: this phase starts when normality has been
re-established. During this phase it is important to study
and understand the emergency, how it could have been
avoided or what responses could have helped to mitigate
it.
The Sensors and Acquisition System Axis (Section 5):
An emergency has four main management phases: preven-
tion, detection, response and understanding of an emergency.
For a computer vision algorithm to help in one or more of
these phases, it is important to have visual sensors to record
the needed information. There are many different types of
devices for this, as also many types of devices in which
they may be installed depending on the type of data being
4 Laura Lopez-Fuentes et al.
Preparedness MitigationRecovery
Data acquisition
Sensor
• Surveillance
camera
• Satellite
• Robot
• UAV
Video
Still
image
Information extraction
• Color features
• Shape features
• Temporal features
Classification algorithm
• Artificial neural 
networks
• Suppor Vector 
Machine
• Fuzzy llogic
• Wavelets
• Hidden Markov
Models
Static
MovingDifferent types
of visual sensors
that can be used
(Section 5)
Emergency
management
(Section 2)
System
algorithm
(Section 6)
• Monocular
• Stereo
• Infra-red
• Thermal
Response
Prevention Detection Assistance Understanding
Emergency
management
in computer
vision
(Section 4)
Fig. 2: A graphical overview of the organization of this survey.
Generic Emergency Group Emergency sub-group Emergency Type
Natural emergencies
Fire
Flood
Drought
Earthquake
Hurricane/Tornado
Landslide/Avalanche
Man-made emergencies
Single person
Falling person
Drowning
Injured civilians
Multiple person
Road accident
Crowd related
Weapon threaten
Table 1: Types of emergencies and their classification.
captured. Some of the most common are: fixed monitoring
cameras, satellites, robots and Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
(UAVs). These devices can capture different types of visual
data, such as stereo or monocular images, infrared or ther-
mal. Depending on the rate of data acquisition this data can
be in the form of video or still images, and the video can be
either from a static or moving source.
The Algorithmic Axis (Section 6): The visual data col-
lected by the sensor is then subject to a feature extraction
process. Finally the features extracted are used as an input to
a modeling or classification algorithm. In Figure 2 the main
feature extraction and classification algorithms are listed.
3 Types of Emergencies
There are many types of emergencies and a great deal of ef-
fort has been invested in classifying and defining them [1,
12]. However there are many emergencies that due to their
nature have not been studied in computer vision, such as
famine or pollution. These types of emergencies do not have
clear visual consequences that can be easily detected by vi-
sual sensors. In this paper we focus only on emergencies
relevant in the computer vision field. In Table 1 we classify
the types of emergencies that we consider in this survey. We
distinguish two generic emergency groups: natural emergen-
cies and man-made emergencies. Natural emergencies are
divided into three emergency types: fire, flood and drought.
Review on Computer Vision Techniques in Emergency Situations 5
Emergencies caused by humans are divided into two sub-
types depending on the scope: emergencies that cause dan-
gers to multiple persons and emergencies that cause dangers
to a single person.
3.1 Natural emergencies
Natural emergencies cover any adverse event resulting from
natural processes of the earth. Natural emergencies can re-
sult in a loss of lives and can have huge economic costs. The
severity of the emergency can be measured by the losses and
the ability of the population to recuperate. Although natural
emergencies are external to humans and therefore can not be
prevented, society has been increasingly able to reduce the
impact of these natural events by building systems for early
detection or assistance during the event. Among these sys-
tems built to detect or assist natural emergencies, computer
vision has played an important role in emergencies related
to fire, flood and drought.
Fire: electric fire detectors have been integrated into build-
ings since the late 1980s. These devices detect smoke, which
is a typical fire indicator. Currently, two major types of elec-
tric smoke detector devices are used [127]: ionization smoke
detectors and photoelectric smoke detectors. Although the
devices achieve very good performance in closed environ-
ments, their reliability decreases in open spaces because they
rely on smoke particles arriving to the sensor. For this rea-
son, fire detection in monitoring cameras has become an im-
portant area of research in computer vision. The use of video
as input in fire detection makes it possible to use in large and
open spaces. Hence, most computer vision algorithms that
study fire detection focus mainly on open spaces [39,61].
However, some articles [89,153] also study fire detection in
closed spaces, claiming to have several advantages over con-
ventional smoke detectors: visual fire detectors can trigger
the alarm before conventional electric devices, as they do
not rely on the position of fire particles, and they can give
information about the position and size of the fire.
Flood: flood results from water escaping its usual bound-
aries in rivers, lakes, oceans or man-made canals due to an
accumulation of rainwater on saturated ground, a rise in the
sea level or a tsunami. As a result, the surrounding lands are
inundated. Floods can result in loss of life and can also have
huge economic impact by damaging agricultural land and
residential areas. Flood detection or modeling algorithms
are still at a very early stage. In computer vision, there are
two main trends: algorithms based on still cameras monitor-
ing flood-prone areas [96] and systems that process satellite
images [111,112,113]. On the one hand, algorithms based
on earth still cameras cover a limited area but do not have
hardware and software restrictions. On the other hand, algo-
rithms based on satellite imagery cover a much wider area,
but if the system is to be installed on board the satellite, there
are many factors that have to be considered when deciding
the type of hardware and software to be used on board a
satellite [90,112,140].
Drought: droughts are significant weather-related disasters
that can result in devastating agricultural, health, economic
and social consequences. There are two main characteristics
that determine the presence of drought in an area: a low sur-
face soil moisture and a decrease in rainfall. Soil moisture
data is rarely computed with visual data, however in [66]
they use high-resolution remotely sensed data to determine
the water balance of the soil. Another technique used to de-
termine the beginning of drought is to compute the differ-
ence between the average precipitation, or some other cli-
matic variable, over some time period and comparing the
current situation to a historical record. Observation of rain-
fall levels can help prevent or mitigate drought. Although
rainfall does not have a clear visual consequence that can
be monitored through cameras, there have been some im-
age processing algorithms studied to map annual rainfall
records [49,140]. These algorithms help to determine the ex-
tension and severity of a drought and to determine regions
likely to suffer from this emergency.
Earthquake: earthquakes are sudden shakes or vibrations
of the ground caused by tectonic movement. The magnitude
of an earthquake can vary greatly from almost impercep-
tible earthquakes (of which hundreds are registered every
day) up to very violent earthquakes that can be devastat-
ing. Earthquake prediction is a whole field of research called
seismology. However, due to the lack of distinctive visual in-
formation about an earthquake, this emergency has received
relatively little attention from the computer vision commu-
nity. Several works address the robustness of motion track-
ing techniques under seismic-induced motions [40,73], with
the aim of assisting rescue and reconnaissance crews. The
main difficulty for these systems is the fact that the camera
itself is also undergoing motion. In [40] this problem is ad-
dressed by introducing a dynamic camera reference system
which is shared between cameras and allows tracking of ob-
jects with respect to this reference coordinate system. Also,
computer vision plays a role during the rescue of people
affected by these natural disaster by detecting people with
robots or UAVs in the damaged areas, this is tackled in the
“injured civilians” section.
Hurricane/tornado: hurricanes and tornadoes are violent
storms characterized by heavy wind and rain. Similarly to
earthquakes, depending on their magnitude they can be al-
most unnoticeable or devastating and at the same time the
visual information derived from these natural disasters has
not yet been studied in the field of computer vision. How-
ever, similarly to earthquakes, robots and UAVs can be used
6 Laura Lopez-Fuentes et al.
to find people in the areas affected by the disaster using hu-
man detection algorithms.
The more general work on “injured civilians” detection
in affected areas which is shared among any other emer-
gency that involves people rescue like earthquakes and hur-
ricanes, is again applicable to landslide and avalanche emer-
gencies. We found one work which evaluates this in partic-
ular for avalanches, and which takes into account the partic-
ular environment where avalanches occur [11].
3.2 Emergencies caused by humans
Emergencies caused by humans cover adverse events and
disasters that result from human activity or man-made haz-
ards. Although natural emergencies are considered to gen-
erate a greater number of deaths and have larger economic
impact, emergencies caused by humans are increasing in im-
portance and magnitude. These emergencies can be uninten-
tionally caused, such as road accidents or drowning persons,
but they can also be intentionally provoked, such as armed
conflicts. In this survey, emergencies caused by humans are
divided in two types depending on their scope: emergencies
affecting multiple persons and emergencies affecting a sin-
gle person.
3.2.1 Emergencies affecting multiple persons
These emergencies are human-caused and affects several per-
sons.
Road accident emergencies: Although depending on the
extent of the emergency they can affect one or multiple per-
sons, we consider road accidents to be multiple-person emer-
gencies. Transport emergencies result from human-made ve-
hicles. They occur when a vehicle collides with another ve-
hicle, a pedestrian, animal or another road object. In re-
cent years, the number of vehicles on the road has increased
dramatically and accidents have become one of the highest
worldwide death factors, reaching the number one cause of
death among those aged between 15 and 29 [159]. In order
to prevent these incidents, safety infrastructure has been de-
veloped, many monitoring cameras have been installed on
roads, and different sensors have been installed in vehicles
to prevent dangerous situations. In computer vision there are
three main fields of study in which have focused on the de-
tection or prevention of transport emergencies.
– Algorithms which focus on detecting anomalies, as in
most cases they correspond to dangerous situations [78,
134,145].
– Algorithms specialized on detecting a concrete type of
road emergency, such as a collision [83,157,176].
– Algorithms based on on-board cameras which are de-
signed to prevent dangerous situations, such as algorithms
that detect pedestrians and warn the driver [53,62,64].
Crowd-related emergencies: These type of emergencies
are normally initiated by another emergency when man per-
sons are gathered in a limited area. They normally occur
in multitudinous events such as sporting events, concerts or
strikes. These type of events pose a great risk because when
any emergency strikes it can lead to collective panic, thus ag-
gravating the initial emergency. This is a fairly new area of
research in computer vision. In computer vision for crowd-
related emergencies we find different sub-topics like crowd
density estimation, analysis of abnormal events [6], crowd
motion tracking [75] and crowd behaviour analysis [51], among
others.
Weapon threat emergencies: Although detecting weapons
through their visual features and characteristics has not yet
been studied in computer vision, some studies have been
done in the direction of detecting the heat produced by them.
A dangerous weapon that threatens innocent people every
year are mines. Millions of old mines are hidden under the
ground of many countries which kill and injure people. These
mines are not visible from the ground but they emit heat
that can be detected using thermal cameras [119,138,164].
Another weapon that can be detected through thermal sen-
sors are guns, due to the heat that they emit when they are
fired [124].
3.2.2 Emergencies affecting a single person
These are emergencies are caused by or affect one person.
The classic example of this is detecting human falling events
for monitoring the well-being of the elderly.
Drowning: Drowning happens when a person lacks air
due to an obstruction of the respiratory track. These situa-
tions normally occur in swimming pools or beach areas. Al-
though most public swimming pools and beaches are staffed
with professional lifeguards, drowning or near-drowning in-
cidents still occur due to staff reaction time. Therefore there
is a need to automate the detection of these events. One way
of automating detection of these events is the installation
of monitoring cameras equipped with computer vision algo-
rithms to detect drowning persons in swimming pools and
beach areas. However, drowning events in the sea are diffi-
cult to monitor due to the extent of the hazardous area, so
most computer vision research on this topic has been fo-
cused in drowning people in swimming pools [42,180].
Injured person: An injured person is a person that has
come to some physical harm. After an accident, reaction
time is crucial to minimize human losses. Emergency re-
sponders focus their work on the rescue of trapped or injured
persons in the shortest time possible. A method that would
help speed up the process is the use of aerial and ground
robots with visual sensors that record the affected area at
the same time as detect human victims. Also, in the event
Review on Computer Vision Techniques in Emergency Situations 7
of an emergency situation, knowing if there are human vic-
tims in the area affected by the event may help determine
the risk the responders are willing to take. For this purpose
autonomous robots have been built to automatically explore
the area and detect human victims without putting at risk
the rescue staff [7,22,88,99,131,142]. Detecting injured or
trapped humans in a disaster area is an extremely challeng-
ing problem from the computer vision perspective due to the
articulated nature of the human body and the uncontrolled
environment.
Falling person: With the growth of the elderly population
there is a growing need to create timely and reliable smart
systems to help and assist seniors living alone. Falls are one
of the major risks the elderly living alone, and early detec-
tion of falls is very important. The most common solution
used today are call buttons, which when the senior can press
to directly call for help. However these devices are only use-
ful if the senior is conscious after the fall. This problem has
been tackled from many different perspectives. On the one
hand wearable devices based on accelerometers have been
studied and developed [28,182], some of these devices are
in process of being commercialized [44]. On the other hand,
falling detection algorithms have been studied from a com-
puter vision perspective [101,129].
4 Monitoring Objective
As stated in Section 2, an emergency has four main phases
which at the same time lead to four emergency management
phases: prevention, detection, response/assistance and un-
derstanding of emergencies. It is important to understand,
study and identify the different phases of an emergency life
cycle since the way to react to it changes consequently. In
this section, we will classify computer vision algorithms for
emergency situations depending on the emergency manage-
ment phase in which they are used.
4.1 Emergency Prevention
This phase focuses on preventing hazards and risk factors to
minimize the likelihood that an emergency will occur. The
study of emergency prevention on computer vision can not
be applied to any emergency since not all of them are in-
duced by risk factors that have relevant visual features that
can be captured by optical sensors. For example, the only
visual feature which is normally present before a fire starts
is smoke. Therefore research on fire prevention in computer
vision focuses on smoke detection. As an example, in Fig-
ure 3 (a) we see a region of forest with a dense smoke that
looks like the starting of a fire, however a fire detection al-
gorithm would not detect anything until the fire is present in
the video. Some early work on this topic started at the be-
ginning of the century [29,56]. Since then, smoke detection
for fire prevention or early fire detection has been an open
topic in computer vision. Most of the work done on smoke
detection is treated as a separate problem from fire detection
and aims to detect smoke at the smoldering phase to prevent
fire [60,166,172,175]. However there is also some work on
smoke and flame detection when the fire has already started
since smoke in many cases can be visible from a further dis-
tance [91,174].
Traffic accidents are considered as one of the main sources
of death and injuries globally. Traffic accidents can be caused
by three main risk factors: the environment, the vehicle and
the driver. Among these risk factors, it is estimated that the
driver accounts for around 90% of road accidents [154]. To
avoid these type of accidents, a lot of security devices have
been incorporated on vehicles in the past years. There are
two types of security devices: “active” whose function is
to decrease the risk of an accident occurring, and “passive”
which try to minimize the injuries and deaths in an accident.
Among the active security devices, there is work on the us-
age of visual sensors to detect situations that could lead to
an accident and force actions that could be taken to prevent
the accident [152].
There are many different kind of traffic accidents but one
of the most common and at the same time more deadly ones
are pedestrians being run over. Due to the variant and de-
formable nature of humans, the environment variability, the
reliability, speed and robustness that a security system is re-
quired, the detection of unavoidable impact with pedestri-
ans has become a challenge in computer vision. This field of
study is well defined and with established benchmarks and
it has served as a common topic in numerous review articles
[13,41,54,165]. Now, with the increase of training data and
computing power this investigation has had a huge peak in
the past years and even the first devices using this technol-
ogy have already been commercialized [117,146]. Figure 3
(b) shows an example of the output from a pedestrian detec-
tion algorithm on board a vehicle.
Another contributing factor to many accidents is the drivers
fatigue, distraction or drowsiness. A good solution to detect
the state of the driver in a non intrusive way is using an on
board camera able to detect the drivers level of attention to
the road. There are different factors that can be taken into
account to determine the level of attention to the road of
a driver. In [31] they determine if the driver is looking at
the road through the head pose and gaze direction, in Fig-
ure 3 (c) we show some examples of the images they used
to train their algorithm. While in [64] they determine 17 fea-
ture points from the face that they consider relevant to detect
the level of drowsiness of a person. In [70] they study the
movements of the eyelid to detect sleepy drivers.
8 Laura Lopez-Fuentes et al.
(a) Example of fire prevention by detecting
smoke. Example taken from [60].
(b) Example of pedestrian detection using a
vehicle on-board camera to prevent pedes-
trians being run over [165].
(c) Example of drowsy driver detection
taken from [31].
Fig. 3: Example situations in which computer vision techniques have been applied for emergency prevention.
Although not so widely studied, there are other type of
road accidents that could also be prevented with the help of
computer vision. For example, in [67] they propose a frame-
work to predict unusual driving behavior which they apply
to right turns at intersections. Algorithms that use on board
cameras to detect the road have also been studied [62], this
could help to detect if a vehicle is about to slip on the road. In
[9] they propose a system with on board stereo cameras that
assist drivers to prevent collisions by detecting sudden accel-
erations and self-occlusions. Multiple algorithms for traffic
sign detection with on board cameras have also widely pro-
posed in the literature [69,118], these algorithms mostly go
in the direction of creating autonomous vehicles, however
they can also be used to detect if the driver is not follow-
ing some traffic rules and is therefore increasing the risk of
provoking an accident.
In order to prevent falls, in [101] they propose a method
to detect slips arguing that a slip is likely to lead to a fall or
that a person that just had a slip is likely to have balance is-
sues that increase the risk of falling down in the near future.
They consider a slip as a sequence of unbalanced postures.
4.2 Emergency Detection
The field of emergency detection through computer vision in
contrast with the field of prevention is much wider and has
been studied in more depth. In this section we will present
the visual information that is being studied to detect differ-
ent emergencies.
Fire detection has been widely studied in computer vi-
sion since it is very useful on open spaces, where other fire
detection algorithms fail. In some cases it is useful to not
only detect the fire but also some properties of the fire such
as the flame height, angle or width [39]. In order to detect
fire on visual content, the algorithms studied exploit visual
and temporal features of fire. In early research, flame was
the main visual feature that was studied in fire detection [24,
61,89,128,153,156] however, as stated in Section 4.1, re-
cently smoke has also been studied in the field of fire de-
tection mainly because it appears before fire and it spreads
faster so in most cases smoke will appear faster in the cam-
era field of view [91,174]. As fire has a non-rigid shape with
no well defined edges, the visual content used to detect fire
is related to the characteristic color of fire. This makes the
algorithms in general vulnerable to lighting conditions and
camera quality.
Water, the main cue for flood detection, has similar vi-
sual difficulties as fire in order to be detected since it has
a non-rigid shape and the edges are also not well defined.
Moreover, water does not have a specific characteristic color
because it might be dirty and it also reflects the surround-
ing colors. Due to the mentioned difficulties flood detection
in computer vision has not been so widely studied. In [96]
they use color information and background detail (because
as said before the background will have a strong effect on
the color of the water) and the ripple pattern of water. In
[16] they analyse the rippling effect of water and they use
the relationship between the averages for each color channel
as a detection metric.
Detecting person falls has become a major interest in
computer vision, specially motivated to develop systems for
elderly care monitoring at home. In order to detect a falling
person it is important to first detect the persons which are
visible in the data and then analyse the movements. Most
algorithms use background subtraction to detect the person
since in indoor situations, most of the movement come from
persons. Then, to determine if the movement of the person
corresponds to a fall some algorithms use silhouette or shape
variation [101,116,130], direction of the main movement
[68], or relative height with respect to the ground [118].
However, sometimes it is difficult to distinguish between a
person falling down and a person sitting, lying or sleeping,
Review on Computer Vision Techniques in Emergency Situations 9
(a) Two very different scenarios such as sitting and
falling may be visually similar, in order to differ-
entiate them some researchers suggest to use tem-
poral information [33].
(b) Example of a person
detection algorithm in a
swimming pool [42].
Fig. 4: Example situations in which computer vision techniques have been applied for emergency detection.
to address this issue, most systems consider the duration of
the event since a fall is usually a faster movement [102,118],
for example, in [33] they consider 10 frames as a fast move-
ment and use this threshold to differentiate two visually sim-
ilar movements such as the ones given in Figure 4 (a) which
corresponds to sitting and falling.
The problem of drowning person detection is fairly sim-
ilar to the falling person detection, since it is also in a closed
environment and related to human motion. Similarly to fall
detection algorithms, the first step to detect a drowning per-
son is to detect the persons visible in the camera range,
which is also done by background subtraction [45,82,104,
180]. In Figure 4 we give an example of a detection of the
persons in a swimming pool using a background modelling
algorithm. However, in this case aquatic environments have
some added difficulties because it is not static [30].
4.3 Emergency Response/Assistance
After an emergency has already occurred, one of the most
important tasks of emergency responders is to help injured
people. However, depending on the magnitude of the disas-
ter, it may be difficult to effectively localize all these persons
so emergency responders may find it useful to use robots or
UAVs to search for these persons. In order to automatically
detect injured people, some of these robots use cameras to-
gether with computer vision algorithms. When considering
disasters taking place on the ground one of the main charac-
teristic of an injured person is that they are normally lying
on the floor so these algorithms are trained to detect lying
people. The main difference between them is the perspec-
tive from which these algorithms expect to get the input, de-
pending if the camera is mounted on a terrestrial robot [22,
88,141,142] or on a UAV [7,99,131].
A fast and efficient response the in the moments after an
emergency has occur ed is critical to minimize damage. For
that it is essential that emergency responders have situational
awareness, which can be obtained through sensors in the
damaged areas, by crowd sourcing applications, and from
social media. However, extracting useful information from
huge amounts of data can be a slow and tedious work. There-
fore, organization of video data that facilitates the browsing
on the data is very important [135]. Since during an emer-
gency it is common to have data on the same event from dif-
ferent angles and perspectives, in [149] the authors combine
interactive spatio-temporal exploration of videos and 3D re-
construction of scenes. In [72] the authors propose a way
of representing the relationship among clips for easy video
browsing. To extract relevant information from videos, in
[38] the authors find recurrent regions in clips which is nor-
mally a sign of relevance. In [103] the authors introduce a
framework of consecutive object detection from general to
fine that automatically detects important features during an
emergency. This also minimizes bandwidth usage, which is
essential in many emergency situations where critical com-
munications infrastructure collapses.
4.4 Emergency Understanding
Keeping record of emergencies is very important to anal-
yse them and extract information in order to understand the
factors that have contributed to provoke the emergency, how
these factors could have been prevented, how the emergency
could have been better assisted to reduce the damages or the
effects of the emergency. The systems developed to with this
objective should feed back into the rest of the systems in or-
der to improve them.
10 Laura Lopez-Fuentes et al.
Sensor
Location Monocular camera Infrared/ Thermalcamera Stereo camera Other
Fixed location
- $50 to $2000
- Up to 30 MP
- Real time data
acquisition
- Limited area
of visualization
- $ 200 to $ 6000
- Up to 1.2 MP
- Up to 0.02°C
sensitivity
- Real time data
acquisition
- Limited area of
visualization
- $ 200 to $ 2000
- Up to 30 MP
- Real time data
acquisition
- Limited area of
visualization
Robot or UAV
- $100 to $2000
- Up to 30 MP
- Portable
- Bad quality
data acquisition
in real time
- Limited
autonomy
- $250 to $2000
- Up to 1.2 MP
- Up to 0.02°C
sensitivity
- Portable
- Bad quality
data acquitision
in real time
- $ 250 to $ 2000
- Up to 30 MP
- Portable
- Bad quality
data acquitision
in real time
- Limited auton-
omy
Satellite
- Open data access
through many research
programs
- Spatial
resolution of around 10m
- Can cover the entire
globe
- May have to wait a few
days until the satellite
covers the entire globe
- Image acquisition is
influenced by weather
conditions like clouds
Table 2: Summary of the advantages and disadvantages of the types of sensors and the location at which they can be placed.
5 Acquisition
Choosing an appropriate acquisition setup is one of the im-
portant design choices. To take this decision one must take
into account the type of emergency addressed (see Section 3)
and objectives to fulfill (see Section 4). One of the things to
consider is the location where the sensor will be placed (e.g.
in a fixed location, mounted on board a satellite, a robot, or a
UAV, etc). Then, depending on the type of sensor we acquire
different types of visual information: monocular, stereo, in-
frared, or thermal. Depending on the frequency in which the
visual information is acquired we can obtain videos or still
images. Finally, this section is summarized in Table 2 where
we include the advantages and disadvantages of the types
of sensors studied and the locations at which they can be
placed The type of sensors chosen for the system will have
an important impact on the types of algorithms that can be
applied, the type of information that can be extracted and the
cost of the system, which is also many times a limitation.
5.1 Sensor location
The physical location where the sensor is installed deter-
mines the physical extent in the real world that will be cap-
tured by the sensor. The location of the sensor depends pri-
marily on the expected physical extent and location of the
emergency that is to be prevented, detected, assisted or un-
derstood.
In a fixed location: When the type of emergency consid-
ered has a limited extent and the location where it can occur
(the area of risk) is predictable, a fixed sensor is normally in-
stalled. In many cases this corresponds to a monitoring cam-
era mounted on a wall or some other environmental struc-
ture. These are the cheapest and most commonly used sen-
sors. They are normally mounted in a high location, where
no objects obstruct their view and pointing to the area of
risk.
Static cameras have been used to detect drowning per-
sons in swimming pools, as in this case the area of risk is
limited to the swimming pool [26,30,42,45,82,104,180].
Review on Computer Vision Techniques in Emergency Situations 11
They have also been used to monitor dangerous areas on
roads, inside vehicles either pointing to the driver to estimate
drowsiness [31,64,94,98], or pointing to the road to process
the area in which it is being driven [54,62,67,69,107,118].
Fixed cameras are also widely used in closed areas to detect
falling persons [33,79,116,130]. Finally, they can occasion-
ally also be used to detect floods or fire in hotspots [16,24,
96,128].
On board robots or UAVs: For emergencies that do not
take place in a specific area, or that need a more immediate
attention, sensors can be mounted on mobile devices such
as robots or UAVs. The main difference between these two
types of devices is the perspective from which the data can
be acquired: terrestrial in the case of a robot, and aerial for
UAVs. On the one hand, the main advantage of these data
sources is that they are flexible and support real time inter-
action with emergency responders. On the other hand, their
main drawback is their limited autonomy due to battery ca-
pacity. Robots and UAVs have been used extensively for hu-
man rescue. In such cases, a visual sensor is mounted on
board the autonomous machine which can automatically de-
tect human bodies [7,22,99,141,142]. The authors of [66]
use a UAV with several optical sensors to capture aerial im-
ages of the ground, estimate the soil moisture, and determine
if an area suffers or is close to suffering drought.
On board satellites: For emergencies of a greater extent,
such as drought, floods or fire, sometimes the use of sensors
on board satellites is more convenient [66,112,113,140]. By
using satellites, it is possible to visualize the whole globe.
However, the biggest drawback of this type of sensor is the
frequency at which the data can be acquired since the satel-
lites are in continuous movement and it may be necessary
to wait up to a few days to obtain information about a spe-
cific area, as an example the Sentinel 2 which is a satellite
in the Copernicus program for disaster management revis-
its every location within the same view angle every 5 days
[43]. Due to this, the information acquired by this type of
sensor is mainly used for assistance or understanding of an
emergency rather than to prevent or detect it.
Multi-view cameras: In some scenarios, like in the street,
it is useful to have views from different perspectives in order
to increase the range or performance of the algorithm. How-
ever, using data from different cameras also entails some
difficulties in combining the different views. Since the most
common scenario where multiple cameras are present is in
the street, this problem has been tackled in pedestrian detec-
tion [155] and traffic accidents [46].
5.2 Type of sensor
Another important decision to take when working with com-
puter vision for emergency management is the type of opti-
cal sensor that should be used. When taking this decision it
is important to take into account the technical characteris-
tics of the available sensors, the type of data that they will
capture, and the cost.
Monocular RGB or greyscale cameras: Monocular cam-
eras are devices that transform light from the visible spec-
trum into an image. This type of visual sensor is the cheapest
and therefore by far the most widely used in computer vision
and monitoring systems. Although these sensors may not be
the optimal in some scenarios (such as fire detection), due to
their low cost and the experience of researchers on the type
of images generated by such sensors, they are used in almost
all emergencies [3,42,71,96,115,151].
Stereo RGB or greyscale cameras: Stereo cameras are
optical instruments that, similarly to monocular cameras,
transform light from the visible spectrum into an image. The
difference between stereo and monocular cameras is that
stereo sensors have at least two lenses with separate image
sensors. The combination of the output from the different
lenses can be used to generate stereo images from which
depth information can be extracted. This type of sensor are
especially useful on board vehicles where the distance be-
tween the objects and the vehicle is essential to estimate if a
collision is likely to occur and when [9]. They are also used
on board of vehicles to detect lanes [37,62].
Infrared/thermal cameras: Infrared or thermal cameras
are devices that detect the infrared radiation emitted by all
objects with a temperature above absolute zero [50]. Sim-
ilarly to common cameras that transform visible light into
images, thermal cameras convert infrared energy into an elec-
tronic signal which is then processed to generate a thermal
image or video. This type of camera has the advantage that
they eliminate the illumination problems that normal RGB
or greyscale cameras have. They are of particular interest
for emergency management scenarios such as fire detection
since fire normally has a temperature higher than its envi-
ronment.
It is also well known that humans have a body temper-
ature that ranges between 36?C and 37?C in normal con-
ditions. This fact can be exploited to detect humans, and
has been used for pedestrian detection to prevent vehicle
collisions with pedestrians [144,161], to detect faces and
pupils [94], and for fall detection for elderly monitoring [139].
Although not so extensively used, thermal and infrared cam-
eras have also been used for military purposes, such as to
detect firing guns [124] and to detect mines under ground
[119,138,164].
One of the disadvantages of thermal cameras compared
with other type of optical sensors is that their resolution is
lower than many other visual sensors. For this reason some
systems use thermal cameras in combination with other sen-
sors. The authors of [66] use a thermal camera among other
12 Laura Lopez-Fuentes et al.
visual sensors to study the surface soil moisture and the wa-
ter balance of the ground, which is in turn used to estimate,
predict and monitor drought.
In order to obtain depth information in addition to ther-
mal information, it is also possible to use infrared stereo
cameras such as in [14] where the authors use infrared cam-
eras to detect pedestrians by detecting their corporal heat,
and then estimate pedestrian position using stereo informa-
tion.
5.3 Acquisition rate
Depending on the rate at which optical data is acquired we
can either obtain video or still images. The main difference
between video and a still image is that still images are taken
individually while video is an ordered sequence of images
taken at a specific and known rate. To be considered a video,
the rate at which images are taken must be enough for the
human eye to perceive movement as continuous.
Video: The main advantage of videos over images is that,
thanks to the known acquisition rate, they provide temporal
information which is invaluable for some tasks. Also, most
of the systems studied in this survey are monitoring systems
meant to automatically detect risky situations or emergen-
cies. As these situations are rare but could happen at any
moment and it is important to detect them as soon as possi-
ble, so it is necessary to have a high acquisition rate.
For the study of many of the emergencies considered in
this survey it is necessary to have temporal information. For
example, merely detecting a person lying on the ground in
a single image is not sufficient to infer that that person has
fallen. Many systems distinguish between a person lying on
the floor and a person that has fallen by using information
about the speed at which this person reached the final pos-
ture [102,129]. Also, systems that estimate likelihood of a
car crash must have temporal information to know at which
speed the external objects are approaching the vehicle. To
estimate driver drowsiness or fatigue, many systems take in-
formation into account such as the frequency at which the
driver closes his eyes and for how long they remain closed
[94].
Moreover, many algorithms developed for the detection
of specific situations also require temporal information. In
order to detect fire, most algorithms exploit the movement
of the fire to differentiate it from the background. Simi-
larly, for drowning person detection, many algorithms use
temporal information to easily segment the person from the
water [30,42,45,104]. Also, many falling person detection
systems use tracking algorithms to track the persons in the
scene [68] or background subtraction algorithms to segment
persons [116].
Still images: Still images, in contrast with video, do not
give information about the movement of the objects in the
scene and does not provide any temporal information. Al-
though most of the algorithms that study the problem of
fire detection use temporal information and therefore require
video, David Van et al. [156] study a system that detects fire
on still images to broaden the applicability of their system.
In some cases due to the sensor used by the system it is
not possible or convenient to obtain videos for example in
systems that use satellite imagery [66,112,113,140], also in
systems that use UAVs where in many cases is more con-
venient to take still images instead of videos in order to ef-
fectively send the data in real time or get higher resolution
imagery [22,141].
5.4 Sensor cost
When implementing the final system, another important fac-
tor that should be taken into account before designing it is
the cost from setting up the system. In general, the cost of
the final system is going to be the cost of the visual sensor,
the cost of the installation of the system and the cost of the
data transmission. In this section we will do a brief study of
the three sources of costs.
The most common visual sensors are monocular RGB
and grayscale cameras. Since these sensors are so common
and have a big demand, their technical features have im-
proved greatly over time and their price has dramatically
decreased. Therefore there exists a wide range of monocular
cameras in the market with different technical features and
prices. Depending on the quality of the device, its price can
vary between approximately $50 to $2000. Although there
also exists a wide variety of infrared cameras, these devices
are less common and in general more expensive. Depend-
ing on the quality of the camera, its price fluctuates between
$200 and $6000. To illustrate that, in the second row from
Table 3 we give an example of a thermal camera of $300
and its specifications. Finally, stereo cameras are the less
common visual sensors and there is fewer variety of these
devices. Their price oscillates between $200 and $2000. In
the third row from Table 3 we present an example of an av-
erage stereo camera. However, it is fairly common to build
a stereo device by attaching two monocular cameras which
makes its price double the price of a monocular camera.
The cost of the installation of the system and the trans-
mission of data varies greatly depending on the localization
in which the sensor is installed. In this case, the cheapest
installation would be at a fixed location, for which it would
only be necessary to buy a holder to fix the sensor and ac-
quire a broadband service in order to transmit the data in
real time. On the other hand, it is also possible to install the
sensor on a mobile device such as a robot or UAV. In this
case it is necessary to first buy the device, whose price also
Review on Computer Vision Techniques in Emergency Situations 13
Device Description
Example of a commonly used UAV. This UAV has an integrated
camera of 12 Mpx, a flying autonomy of 28 minutes, a maximum
transmission distance of 5km a live view working frequency of
2.4GHz and a live view quality of 720P and 30fps. This device can
be bought on the market for around $1200.
Example of a thermal camera that can be attached to a smart phone.
It has an VGA resolution a sensibility of 0.1ºC and works with tem-
peratures between -20ºC to 120ºC. A device if these characteristics
can be bought for around $300.
Example of a built in stereo camera of 10 MP resolution and a cost
of $600.
Table 3: Some examples of devices used in computer vision for emergency management systems, their cost and specifica-
tions.
have big fluctuations depending on their quality and tech-
nical characteristics such as its autonomy, dimensions and
stability. A low cost robot or UAV can be bought for around
$50 while high quality ones can cost around $20000. More-
over, these devices require a complex transmission system
since the sensor is going to be in continuous movement. In
fact, since these systems are meant to acquire data over a
limited period of time, it is common not to install any trans-
mission data system but saving all the data in the device and
processing it after the acquisition is over. It is also possible
to install a antenna on the device that transmits these data
in real time over 2.4GHz or 5.8GHz frequency. In the first
row from Table 3 we show an example of a commonly used
drone with an integrated camera and with a 2.4GHz antenna
for live data transmission.
6 Algorithms
In this section we review the most popular algorithms that
have been applied in computer vision applications for emer-
gency situations. We have considered the nine different types
of emergencies that we introduced in Section 3. When se-
lecting the articles to review in this survey we have consid-
ered a total of 114 papers that propose a computer vision
system for some emergency management. However, not all
the types of emergencies have bee equally studied in the lit-
erature nor in the survey, in Figure 5 we show a bar graph of
the distribution of the articles among the different types of
emergencies.
This section is divided in two main parts: feature extrac-
tion and machine learning algorithms. In the feature extrac-
tion part various approaches to extracting relevant informa-
tion from the data are elaborated. Once that information is
extracted, machine learning algorithms are applied to incor-
porate spatial consistency (e.g. Markov Random Fields), to
model uncertainty (e.g. Fuzzy logic) and to classify the data
to high-level semantic information, such as the presence of
fire or an earthquake. We have focused on methods which
are (or could be) applied to a wider group of applications in
emergency management.
6.1 Feature extraction
Feature extraction in computer vision is the process of re-
ducing the information in the data into a more compact rep-
resentation which contains the relevant information for the
task at hand. This is a common practice in computer vision
algorithms related to emergency situations. We divide the
features in three main groups: color, shape and temporal.
6.1.1 Color features
The understanding of emergency situations often involves
the detection of materials and events which have no specific
spatial extent or shape. Examples include water, fire, and
smoke. However, these textures often have a characteristic
color, and therefore color features can provide distinctive
features.
Color analysis is a well established computer vision re-
search field and has been broadly applied in applications in
emergency management. It is frequently used to detect fire
14 Laura Lopez-Fuentes et al.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
P
ae
p
er
s 
re
vi
ew
ed
 in
 t
h
is
 a
rt
ic
le
Type of emergency
Fire
Flood
Drought
Falling person
Drowning
Injured civilians
Road accident
Crowd Related
Weapon threaten
Fig. 5: Articles studied in this survey by type of emergency.
and smoke since they have characteristic colors and – al-
though not so frequently – it has also been used to detect
flooded regions. Fire color may vary depending on the com-
bustion material and the temperature. However most flames
are yellow, orange and especially red. Smoke tends to be
dark or white and can be more or less opaque. Water in
flooded regions, according to [16], presents a smooth dark
surface or strong reflective spots much brighter than the sur-
roundings.
One of the principle choices in color feature extraction
is the color space or color model from which to compute the
features. This choice influences characteristics of the color
feature, including photometric invariance properties [55], de-
vice dependence, and whether it is perceptually uniform or
not [74]. Here we will shortly review the most used color
models and briefly describe some of their advantages and
disadvantages.
The data produced by camera devices is typically in RGB
color model. Due to the effortless availability of this color
model and the separation of the red values, this color model
has been often used for fire, smoke and flood detection [15,
27,128,151]. The main disadvantage of this color model is
its lack of illumination invariance and dependence on the
sensor. The HSI and HSV color models were proposed to
resemble the color sensing properties of human vision and
separate the luminance component from the chromatic ones.
They have been applied to smoke detection [8], to detect
light gray water [16] and to detect deep water [96]. Sev-
eral systems combine RGB and HSI color models [29,128,
174]. The YCbCr color model has three components, one of
which encodes the luminance information and two encode
the chromaticity. Having the luminance component sepa-
rated from chromatic components makes it robust to changes
in illumination [24,96]. Similarly to HSI and YCbCr, the
CIELab color model makes it possible to separate the lumi-
nance information from the chromaticity. Moreover, it is de-
vice independent and perceptually uniform. This color model
has been used to detect fire [23,153] and to improve the
background models for swimming pools [42].
6.1.2 Shape and texture features
There are elements which are very characteristic of some
of the emergencies presented in this survey, such as smoke
or flames to detect fire, pedestrians to prevent traffic colli-
sions or persons to detect victims in disaster areas. Detect-
ing these characteristic elements is common to many of the
algorithms proposed for emergency management with com-
puter vision. The primary goal of many of these algorithms
is to prevent or detect human harm and therefore humans are
a common characteristic element of these emergency scenar-
ios. The histogram of oriented gradients (HOG) descriptor
was introduced to detect pedestrians and is one of the most
used shape descriptors to detect humans. Among the algo-
rithms studied in this survey, HOG was used to detect per-
sons in disaster areas [7,141,142], to detect pedestrians for
on board vehicle cameras [144,165] but also to character-
ize other objects such as flames, smoke and traffic signs [8,
160,179] and as a descriptor for a tracking algorithm [51] in
crowd event recognition. Local binary patterns is also a well
known shape descriptor which is used to describe textures
and was successfully applied to the task of smoke detec-
tion [148,172].
Review on Computer Vision Techniques in Emergency Situations 15
6.1.3 Temporal features
Most of the input data used in emergency management comes
in form of videos, which provide visual information as well
as temporal information. Here we briefly summarize the main
features which exploit the available temporal information in
the data.
Wavelets: Flicker is an important characteristic of smoke
and flames and has been used in several systems to detect fire
and smoke in video data. Fourier analysis is the standard tool
for analysis of spatial frequency patterns. The extension of
frequency analysis to spatial-temporal signals was first stud-
ied by Haar [63] and later led to the wavelet transform [110].
In [151] the authors study the periodic behaviour of the
boundaries of the moving fire-colored regions. The flick-
ering flames can be detected by finding zero crossings of
the wavelet transform coefficients which are an indicator
of activity within the region. In [168] the flicker of smoke
is detected computing the temporal high-frequency activ-
ity of foreground pixels by analysing the local wavelet en-
ergy. They also use frequency information to find smoke
boundaries by detecting the decrease in high frequency con-
tent since the smoke is semi-transparent at its boundaries.
In [21] the authors present an algorithm which uses a Dis-
crete Wavelet Transform to analyse the blockwise energy of
the image. The variance over time of this energy value was
found to be an indicator of the presence or absence of smoke.
In [57] the authors perform a vertical, horizontal and diag-
onal frequency analysis using the Stationary Wavelet Trans-
form and its inverse. A characterization of smoke behaviour
in the wavelet domain was done in [60] by decomposing the
image into wavelets and analyzing its frequency information
at various scales.
Optical flow: Optical flow estimates the motion of all the
pixels of a frame with respect to the previous frame [10,
106]. The objective of algorithms based on optical flow is
to determine the motion of objects in consecutive frames.
Many techniques have been proposed in the literature to per-
form optical flow [18,19,52], however the most widely used
technique is the one proposed by Lucas-Kanade [106] with
some extensions [17].
Optical flow algorithms have been used in several com-
puter vision systems for emergency management, such as
for the detection of fire and smoke and anomalous situations
on roads or in crowds. In the case of fire and smoke de-
tection several approaches use the pyramidal Lucas-Kanade
optical flow algorithm to determine the flow of candidate re-
gions which likely to contain fire or smoke and to discard
regions that do not present a high variation on the flow rate
characteristic of the fire turbulence [128,174]. The pyrami-
dal Lucas-Kanade optical flow algorithm assumes that the
objects in the video are rigid with a Lambertian surface and
negligible changes in brightness but the drawback is that
these assumptions do not hold for fire and smoke. Address-
ing this problem, Kolesov et al. [91] proposed a modification
to Lucas-Kanade in which they assume brightness and mass
conservation. Optical flow has been also used to analyse the
motion of crowds in order to determine abnormal and there-
fore potentially dangerous situations [4,75,115]. In [145]
they use an optical flow technique to model the traffic dy-
namics of the road, however instead of doing a pixel by pixel
matching they consider each individual car as a particle for
the optical flow model.
Background modeling and subtraction: The separation
of background from foreground is an important step in many
of the applications for emergency management. Background
modeling is an often applied technique for applications with
static cameras (see Section 5.1) and static background. The
aim of this method is to compute a representation of the
video scene with no moving objects, a comprehensive re-
view can be seen in [122].
In the context of emergency management, the method
of Stauffer and Grimson [143] has been used to segment
fire, smoke and persons from the background [5,21,104,
147,153,160]. Although not as popular, other background
subtraction algorithms have been proposed in the literature [35,
77,87,100] and used in systems for emergency management [75,
89,101,137,151]. An interesting application of background
modeling was described in [83] in the context of abnormal
event detection in emergency situations. They assume that
vehicles involved in an accident or an abnormal situation re-
main still for a considerable period of time. Therefore an
abnormal situation or accident can be detected in a surveil-
lance video by comparing consecutive background models.
Tracking: Tracking in computer vision is the problem of
locating moving objects of interest in consecutive frames of
a video. The shape of tracked objects can be represented
by points, primitive geometric shapes or the object silhou-
ette [173]. Representing the object to be tracked as points
is particularly useful when object boundaries are difficult to
determine, for example when tracking crowds [75] where
detecting and tracking each individual person may be in-
feasible. It is also possible to represent the tracked objects
as primitive objective shapes, for example in [104] the au-
thors use ellipses to represent swimmers for the detection
of drowning incidents. It is also common to represent the
tracked objects as rectangles, e.g. in swimmer detection [30]
and traffic accident detection [83]. Finally, tracked objects
can also be represented with the object’s silhouette or con-
tour [82].
Feature selection is crucial for tracking accuracy. The
features chosen must be characteristic of the objects to be
tracked and as unique as possible. In the context of fall de-
tection, the authors of [68] use skin color to detect the head
of the tracked person. Many tracking algorithms use motion
as the main feature to detect the object of interest, for exam-
16 Laura Lopez-Fuentes et al.
ple applications in traffic emergencies [71,83], fall detec-
tion [79,101], and drowning person detection [104]. Haar-
like features [158] have been widely used in computer vi-
sion for object detection, and have been applied to swim-
mer detection [30]. Finally, descriptors such as Harris [65]
or HOG [36] can also be useful for crowd analysis [51,75].
6.1.4 Convolutional features
Recently, convolutional features have led to a very good per-
formance in analyzing visual imagery. Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNN) were first proposed in 1990 by LeCun et
al. [97]. However, due to the lack of training data and com-
putational power, it was not until 2012 [93] that these net-
works started to be extensively used in the computer vision
community.
CNNs have also been used in the recent years for some
emergency challenges, mainly fire and smoke detection in
images or video and anomalous event detection in videos.
For the task of smoke detection, some researchers proposed
novel networks to perform the task [48,167]. In [48] the au-
thors propose a 9-layer convolutional network and they use
the output of the last layer as a feature map of the regions
containing fire, while in [167] the authors construct a CNN
and use domain adaptation to alleviate the gap between their
synthetic fire and smoke training data and their real test data.
Other researchers have concentrated on solutions built
using existing networks [95,109]. In [109] the authors re-
train some existing architectures, while in [95] the authors
use already trained architectures to give labels to the images
and then classify those labels into fire or not fire. For the task
of anomaly detection, algorithms need to take temporal and
spatial information into account. To handle this problem the
authors in [32,114] propose to use a Long Short-Term Mem-
ory (LSTM) to predict the evolution of the video based on
previous frames. If the reconstruction error between subse-
quent frames and the predictions is very high it is considered
to be an anomaly. In [183] the authors consider only the re-
gions of the video which have changed over the last period
of time and send those regions through a spatial-temporal
CNN. In [132] the authors pass a pixel-wise average of every
pair of frames through a 4-layered fully connected network
and an autoencoder trained on normal regions.
6.2 Machine learning
In the vast majority of the applications in emergency man-
agement machine learning algorithms are applied. They are
used for classification and regression to high-level semantic
information, to impose spatial coherence, as well as to esti-
mate uncertainty of the models. Here we briefly discuss the
most used algorithms.
6.2.1 Artificial Neural Networks
Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) have received consider-
able interest due to their wide range of applications and abil-
ity to handle problems involving imprecise and complex non-
linear data. Moreover, their learning and prediction capabil-
ities combine with impressive accuracy values for a wide
range of problems. A neural network is composed of a large
number of interconnected nonlinear computing elements or
neurons organized in an input layer, a variable number of
hidden layers and an output layer. The design of a neural
network model requires three steps: selection of the statis-
tical variables or features, selection of the number of layers
(really the hidden layers) and nodes and selection of transfer
function. So, the different statistical variables or features, the
number of nodes and the selected transfer function, make the
difference between the papers found showing applications of
the ANN to prevention and detection of emergencies using
computer vision and image processing techniques.
Applications of ANNs to fire and smoke detection and
prevention can be seen in papers [91,169,174,175]. They
mainly differ in the characteristics of the network. In [169]
the authors extract features of the moving target which are
normalized and fed to a single-layer artificial neural net-
work with five inputs, one hidden layer with four process-
ing elements, and one output layer with one processing ele-
ment to recognize fire smoke. In [174] they propose a neu-
ral network to classify smoke features. In [91] they imple-
ment an ANN fire/smoke pixel classifier. The classifier is
implemented as a single-hidden-layer neural network with
twenty hidden units, with a softmax non-linearity in the hid-
den layer. The method proposed in [175] describes a neural
network classifier with a hidden layer is trained and used for
discrimination of smoke and non-smoke objects. The output
layer uses a sigmoid transfer function.
In the system presented in [2] a neural network of per-
ceptrons was used to classify falls against the set of prede-
fined situations. Here, the neural network analyses the bi-
nary map image of the person and identifies which plausible
situation the person is at any particular instant in time.
In general, the usage of ANNs provide a performance
improvement compared to other learning methods [34]. The
results rely highly on the selected statistical values for train-
ing. If the selection of statistical values is not appropriate,
the results on the accuracy might be lower and simpler ma-
chine learning algorithm may be preferred.
Deep Learning ANN algorithms that consist of more than
one hidden layer are usually called deep learning algorithms.
Adding more layers to the network increases the complexity
of the algorithm making it more suitable to learn more com-
plex tasks. However, increasing the layers of the network
comes at a higher computational cost and a higher probabil-
ity to overfit or converge to a local minima. Nevertheless, the
Review on Computer Vision Techniques in Emergency Situations 17
advances in computers and the increase in training data has
facilitated the research towards deeper models which have
proven to improve the results.
In [34] the authors propose a multi-layered ANN for
smoke features classification. In the works [2,47,80,139]
we find applications of ANNs to prevent and detect single-
person emergencies. A neural network is used to classify
falls in [139] using vertical velocity estimates derived either
directly from the sensor data or from the tracker. The net-
work described in [81], with four hidden layers, is used in
the classifier design to do posture classification that can be
used to determine if a person has fallen. In [47] the authors
monitor human activities using a multilayer perceptron with
focus on detecting three types of fall.
6.2.2 Support Vector Machines
Support vector machines (SVMs) are a set of supervised ma-
chine learning algorithms based on statistical learning and
risk minimization which are related to classification and re-
gression problems. Given a set of labeled samples a trained
SVM creates an hyperplane or a set of them, in a high di-
mensional space, that optimally separates the samples be-
tween classes maximizing the separation margin among classes.
Many computer vision systems related to emergency situa-
tions can be considered as a binary classification problems:
fire or no fire, fall or no fall, crash or no crash. To solve this
classification problem many researches make use of SVMs
[116,144,148,153] based on the classification performance
that they can reach, their effectiveness to work on high di-
mensional spaces and their ability to achieve good perfor-
mance with few data.
In more complex systems where it is difficult to predict
the type of emergencies that may occur, for example in sys-
tems that supervise crowded areas or traffic, algorithms that
consider abnormal behaviours as potential emergencies have
been proposed [123,163]. A difficulty of these kind of sys-
tems is that they can only be trained with samples of one
class (normal scenes). For these kind of problems one-class
SVMs, which find a region of a high dimensional space that
contains the majority of the samples, are well suited.
6.2.3 Hidden Markov Models
Hidden Markov Models (HMMs), which are especially known
for their application in temporal pattern recognition such as
speech, handwriting, gesture and action recognition [170],
are a type of stochastic state transition model [125]. HMMs
make it possible to deal with time-sequence data and can
provide time-scale invariability in recognition. Therefore it
is one of the preferred algorithms to analyze emergency sit-
uations subject to time variability.
To detect smoke regions from video clips, a dynamic tex-
ture descriptor is proposed in [172]. The authors propose
a texture descriptor with Surfacelet transformation ([105])
and Hidden Markov Tree model (HMT). Examples of use of
Markov models to study human-caused emergencies that af-
fect a single person can be seen in the following works [26,
42,79,147,150], covering fall detection and detection be-
havior of a swimmer and drownings. Hidden Markov Mod-
els have been applied on monitoring emergency situations
in crowds by learning patterns of normal crowd behaviour
in order to identify unusual or emergency events, as can
be seen in [4,6]. In these two works Andrade and his team
presents similar algorithms in order to detect emergency events
in crowded scenarios, and based on optical flow to extract in-
formation about the crowd behaviour and the Hidden markov
Models to detect abnormal events in the crowd.
To?reyin and his team in [150] use Hidden Markov Mod-
els to recognize possible human motions in video. Also they
use audio track with a three-state HMM to distinguish a per-
son sitting on a floor from a person stumbling and falling. In
[147] the motion analysis is performed by means of a lay-
ered hidden markov model (LHMM). A fall detection sys-
tem based on motion and posture analysis with surveillance
video is presented in [79]. The authors propose a context-
based fall detection system by analyzing human motion and
posture using a discrete hidden Markov model. The prob-
lem of recognition of several specific behaviours of a swim-
mer (including backstroke, breaststroke, freestyle and but-
terfly, and abnormal behaviour) in a swimming pool using
Hidden Markov Models is addressed in [26]. The algorithm
presented in [42] detects water crises within highly dynamic
aquatic environments where partial occlusions are handled
using a Markov Random Field framework.
Hidden Markov Models have been applied on monitor-
ing emergency situations in crowds by learning patterns of
normal crowd behavior in order to identify unusual or emer-
gency events, as can be seen in [4,6]. In these two works
Andrade and his team presents similar algorithms in order
to detect emergency events in crowded scenarios, and based
on optical flow to extract information about the crowd be-
havior and the Hidden Markov Models to detect abnormal
events in the crowd.
6.2.4 Fuzzy logic
Fuzzy sets theory and fuzzy logic are powerful frameworks
for performing automated reasoning, and provide a princi-
pled approach to address the inherent uncertainty related
to modeling; an aspect which relevant in many emergency
management application. Fuzzy set theory, originally intro-
duced by Lofti A. Zadeh in 1965 [177], is an extension of
classical set theory where to each element x from a set A
is associated with a value between 0 and 1, representing its
18 Laura Lopez-Fuentes et al.
degree of belonging to the set A. One important branch of
the fuzzy set theory is fuzzy logic [178]. An inference en-
gine operators on rules that are structured in an IF-THEN
rules, are presented. Rules are constructed from linguistic
variables. A fuzzy approach has the advantage that the rules
and linguistic variables are understandable and simplify ad-
dition, removal, and modification of the system’s knowl-
edge.
In the papers [3] and [147] the authors proposed a multi-
camera video-based methods for monitoring human activi-
ties, with a particular interest to the problem of fall detec-
tion. They use methods and techniques from fuzzy logic and
fuzzy sets theory. Thome et al. [147] apply a fuzzy logic fu-
sion process that merges features of each camera to provide
a multi-view pose classifier efficient in unspecified condi-
tions (viewpoints). In [3], they construct a three-dimensional
representation of the human from silhouettes acquired from
multiple cameras monitoring the same scene, called voxel
person. Fuzzy logic is used to determine the membership
degree of the person to a pre-determined number of states at
each image. A method, based on temporal fuzzy inference
curves representing the states of the voxel person, is pre-
sented for generating a significantly smaller number of rich
linguistic summaries of the humans state over time with the
aim to detect of fall detection.
Another problem addressed with methods and techniques
from theory of fuzzy sets is fire prevention by smoke detec-
tion. It has been observed that the bottom part of a smoke
region is less mobile than top part over time; this is called
swaying motion of smoke. In [162] a method to detect early
smoke in video is presented, using swaying motion and a
diffusion feature. In order to realized data classification based
on information fusion, Choquet fuzzy integral (see [59]) was
adopted to extract dynamic regions from video frames, and
then, a swaying identification algorithm based on centroid
calculation was used to distinguish candidate smoke region
from other dynamic regions. Finally, Truong et al. [153] pre-
sented a four-stage smoke detection algorithm, where they
use a fuzzy c-means algorithm method to cluster candidate
smoke regions from the moving regions.
6.3 Algorithmic trends in emergency management
To analyze the usage of the discussed algorithms across emer-
gency types, we provide a more in depth analysis of the
three most studied emergencies: fire, road accidents, and hu-
man fall. In Figure 6(a-c) we break down the algorithms that
have been used for these three types of emergencies. As can
be seen in the figures, for the three types of emergencies,
the most commonly applied algorithms are the ones that
use temporal features. For fire and human fall management
background subtraction is the most popular algorithm since
most times the most discriminative feature of the objects of
interest in this scenarios move on top of a static background.
In the case of road accident management it is common to use
non-static cameras (such as cameras on board a vehicle) and
therefore the background is not static and background sub-
traction algorithms are not useful. However, temporal fea-
tures are used to perform optical flow or tracking in order to
determine the trajectory of the objects in the road or close
by. For fire color features are very distinctive and therefore
more researched.
7 Discussion
There are many video monitoring systems whose aim is to
monitor various types of emergency scenarios. Since contin-
uous human vigilance of these recordings is infeasible, most
of this data is used a posteriori. Although this information is
very useful for the later understanding of the event or as an
incriminatory proof, many researchers study the possibility
of exploiting these huge amounts of data and analysing them
in real time with the hope of preventing some of these emer-
gencies or to facilitate a faster or more efficient response. In
this survey we reviewed and analyzed the progress of com-
puter vision covering many types of emergencies with the
goal of unveiling the overlap across emergency research in
computer vision, especially in the hardware and algorithms
developed, making it easier to researchers to find relevant
works.
In order to restrict the scope of this survey we first gave a
description of what we consider emergency situations. Tak-
ing into account the description provided, we restrict our-
selves to emergency scenarios that have been studied in the
context of computer vision. Taking all these considerations
into account we identified eleven different emergency sce-
narios, studied in computer vision, which we classified into
natural emergencies and emergencies caused by humans.
After a thorough analysis of the state-of-the-art algorithms
on these topics, we inferred that there are four main axes
that have to be taken into account when creating computer
vision systems to help in emergency scenarios: the type of
emergency that is going to be addressed, the monitoring ob-
jective, the hardware and sensors needed, and the algorithms
used.
When talking about the monitoring objective, we have
seen that prevention through computer vision techniques can
only be done when there is visual evidence of risk factors
such as for fire detection using smoke features, car accidents
by detecting pedestrians, driver drowsiness and unusual be-
haviours, and finally fall prevention falls by detecting slips.
The most common objective is emergency detection, which
has been studied in all the emergencies studied in this sur-
vey. It is also common to use computer vision to detect hu-
mans in disaster areas to assist emergency responders. Fi-
Review on Computer Vision Techniques in Emergency Situations 19
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Color features Shape features Temporal features Machine learning
Fire
Color features Shape features Wavelets
Optical flow Background subtraction Artificial neural networks
Support Vector Machines Hidden Markov Models Fuzzy logic
(a) Algorithms used for fire emergency
management.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Color features Shape features Temporal features Machine learning
Road accidents
Color features Shape features Wavelets
Optical flow Background subtraction Tracking
Artificial neural networks Support Vector Machines Hidden Markov Models
Fuzzy logic
(b) Algorithms used for road accidents
emergency management.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Color features Shape features Temporal features Machine learning
Falling person
Color features Shape features Wavelets
Optical flow Background subtraction Tracking
Artificial neural networks Support Vector Machines Hidden Markov Models
Fuzzy logic
(c) Algorithms used for human fall emer-
gency management.
Fig. 6: Overview of the algorithms that have been used to manage the three most studied emergency scenarios.
nally, computer vision has not played a role from the emer-
gency understanding point of view.
From all the acquisition methods studied in Section 5 we
have concluded that the most common sensors are monocu-
lar RGB or grayscale cameras – mainly for their low cost –
and that they are normally situated in fixed locations. How-
ever, we see a trend in the use of UAVs which are becoming
cheaper and provide great flexibility through their mobility.
Finally, as discussed in Section 6.3, it is very difficult to
draw conclusions on algorithmic trends for every emergency
since some of them have little impact in computer vision.
However, there is a clear tendency towards using color and
temporal features for fire emergencies, a clear preference for
temporal features in road accidents, and tracking algorithms
and background subtraction techniques are the most com-
mon when detecting falling person events.
This up-to-date survey will be important for helping read-
ers obtain a global view. At the same time they can find
novel ideas of how computer vision can be helpful to pre-
vent, respond and recover from emergency scenarios, and
learn about some required hardware and relevant algorithms
that are developed to solve these problems.
It is extremely difficult to compare different algorithms
proposed in the literature for solving similar problems due
to the lack of unified benchmarks. From all the papers stud-
ied during this review, over 60% used non-publicly avail-
able datasets. In order to facilitate a common benchmark
to compare algorithms, in Table 4 we report some of the
most important publicly available datasets used among the
emergencies studied in this survey. Note that some pedes-
trian datasets are shared among emergencies since detecting
humans is considered useful in more than one emergency.
In general, we have seen a tendency to create more com-
plex systems that combine different algorithms or algorithms
of a higher computational complexity which in many cases
could not have been feasible with the previous generations
of computers. Among these computationally complex al-
gorithms, the emerging techniques that stand out are those
based on Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) and Deep
Learning [58,84,181]. The field of computer vision is expe-
riencing rapid change since the rediscovery of CNNs. These
algorithms have already been introduced in some emergency
scenarios studied in this survey and we believe that the im-
pact of CNNs will grow over the years in the field of emer-
gency management with computer vision. Moreover, with
the decreasing cost of visual acquisition devices such as in-
frared cameras or stereo cameras, there is a trend of combin-
ing different information sources which can help to increase
accuracy rates and decrease false alarms. We also believe
that, with the help of this survey and further study of the
overlap that exists between the algorithms developed to de-
tect and study different types of emergency situations, it will
be possible in the future to create system that can cover more
than one type of emergency.
References
1. Abdallah, S., Burnham, G.: Public health guide for emergencies.
Boston: The Johns Hopkins School of Hygiene and Public Health
and The International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies (2000)
2. Alhimale, L., Zedan, H., Al-Bayatti, A.: The implementation of
an intelligent and video-based fall detection system using a neu-
ral network. Applied Soft Computing 18, 59 – 69 (2014)
3. Anderson, D., Luke, R.H., Keller, J.M., Skubic, M., Rantz, M.,
Aud, M.: Linguistic summarization of video for fall detection
using voxel person and fuzzy logic. Computer vision and image
understanding 113(1), 80–89 (2009)
4. Andrade, E.L., Blunsden, S., Fisher, R.B.: Hidden Markov mod-
els for optical flow analysis in crowds. In: 18th International
Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR’06), vol. 1, pp. 460–
463. IEEE (2006)
5. Andrade, E.L., Blunsden, S., Fisher, R.B.: Modelling crowd
scenes for event detection. In: 18th International Conference
on Pattern Recognition (ICPR’06), vol. 1, pp. 175–178. IEEE
(2006)
6. Andrade, E.L., Fisher, R.B., Blunsden, S.: Detection of emer-
gency events in crowded scenes. In: Crime and Security, 2006.
20 Laura Lopez-Fuentes et al.
Type of
emergency
Public datasets General comments Url
Fire
VISOR smoke dataset Videos with evidence of smoke. http://imagelab.ing.unimore.it/
visor
Fire dataset from the Bilkent
University
Videos with evidence of smoke and fire. http://signal.ee.bilkent.edu.
tr/VisiFire/
MESH database of news con-
tent
Instances of catastrophe related videos
from the Deutsche Welle broadcaster with
several news related to fires in a variety of
conditions.
http://www.mesh-ip.eu/
FASTData Collection of fire images and videos. http://fire.nist.gov/fastdata
Fire and smoke dataset Clips containing evidence of fire and
smoke in several scenarios.
http://signal.ee.bilkent.edu.
tr/VisiFire/Demo
Fall detection
CIRL fall detection dataset Indoor videos for action recognition and
fall detection, not available for comercial
purposes.
http://www.derektanderson.com/
fallrecognition/datasets.html
MMU fall detection dataset 20 indoor videos including 38 normal ac-
tivities and 29 different falls
http://foe.mmu.edu.my/
digitalhome/FallVideo.zip
Multiple camera fall dataset 24 videos of falls and fall confounding sit-
uations recorded with 8 cameras in differ-
ent angles.
http://www.iro.umontreal.ca/
~labimage/Dataset/
Injured civilians NICTA dataset Contains a total of 25551 unique pedestri-ans.
https://research.csiro.au/
data61/automap-datasets-and-
code
MIT pedestrian dataset 924 images of 64x128 containing pedes-
trians.
http://cbcl.mit.edu/software-
datasets/PedestrianData.html
Road accident
MIT pedestrian dataset 924 images of 64x128 containing pedes-
trians.
http://cbcl.mit.edu/software-
datasets/PedestrianData.html
INRIA pedestrian dataset Images of pedestrians and negative im-
ages.
http://pascal.inrialpes.fr/
data/human/
CAVIAR dataset Sequences containing pedestrians, also
suitable for action recognition.
http://groups.inf.ed.ac.uk/
vision/CAVIAR
Trajectory based anomalous
event detection
Synthetic and real-world data. http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
document/4633642/
The German Traffic Sign de-
tection benchmark
900 images of roads with traffic sign
ground truth.
http://benchmark.ini.rub.de
Thermal pedestrian database 10 sequences containing pedestrians
recorded with a thermal camera.
http://vcipl-okstate.org/pbvs/
bench/
TUD Brussels and TUD
Paris, Multi-Cue Onboard
Pedestrian Detection
Images of pedestrians taken by on-board
cameras.
ttps://www.mpi-inf.mpg.de/
departments/computer-vision-
and-multimodal-computing/
research/people-detection-
pose-estimation-and-tracking
Crowd related
Simulation of Crowd Prob-
lems for Computer Vision
Approach for generating video evidence
of dangerous situations in crowded
scenes.
https://www.icsa.inf.ed.ac.uk/
publications/online/0493.pdf
PETS dataset Sequences containing different crowd ac-
tivities.
http://www.cvg.reading.ac.uk/
PETS2009/a.html
Unusual crowd activity
dataset
Clip with unusual crowd activities. http://mha.cs.umn.edu/Movies/
Crowd-Activity-All.avi
USCD anomaly detection
dataset
Clips of the street with stationary camera. http://www.svcl.ucsd.edu/
projects/anomaly/dataset.htm
UMN monitoring human ac-
tivity dataset
Videos of crowded scenes. http://mha.cs.umn.edu/proj_
recognition.shtml#crowd_count
Table 4: Recompilation of the publicly available datasets used in the papers reviewed in this manuscript. Only about 40% of
the papers reviewed used datasets publicly available.
The Institution of Engineering and Technology Conference on,
pp. 528–533. IET (2006)
7. Andriluka, M., Schnitzspan, P., Meyer, J., Kohlbrecher, S., Pe-
tersen, K., Von Stryk, O., Roth, S., Schiele, B.: Vision based
victim detection from unmanned aerial vehicles. In: Intelligent
Review on Computer Vision Techniques in Emergency Situations 21
Robots and Systems (IROS), 2010 IEEE/RSJ International Con-
ference on, pp. 1740–1747. IEEE (2010)
8. Barmpoutis, P., Dimitropoulos, K., Grammalidis, N.: Smoke de-
tection using spatio-temporal analysis, motion modeling and dy-
namic texture recognition. In: 2014 22nd European Signal Pro-
cessing Conference (EUSIPCO), pp. 1078–1082. IEEE (2014)
9. Barth, A., Franke, U.: Tracking oncoming and turning vehicles
at intersections. In: Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC),
2010 13th International IEEE Conference on, pp. 861–868. IEEE
(2010)
10. Beauchemin, S.S., Barron, J.L.: The computation of optical flow.
ACM computing surveys (CSUR) 27(3), 433–466 (1995)
11. Bejiga, M.B., Zeggada, A., Nouffidj, A., Melgani, F.: A convo-
lutional neural network approach for assisting avalanche search
and rescue operations with UAV imagery. Remote Sensing 9(2),
100 (2017)
12. Below, R., Wirtz, A., Guha-Sapir, D.: Disaster category classifi-
cation and peril terminology for operational purposes. Brussels:
CRED/Munich: MunichRe Foundation (2009)
13. Benenson, R., Omran, M., Hosang, J., Schiele, B.: Ten years
of pedestrian detection, what have we learned? In: Computer
Vision-ECCV 2014 Workshops, pp. 613–627. Springer (2014)
14. Bertozzi, M., Broggi, A., Lasagni, A., Rose, M.: Infrared stereo
vision-based pedestrian detection. In: IEEE Proceedings. Intelli-
gent Vehicles Symposium, 2005., pp. 24–29. IEEE (2005)
15. Borges, P.V.K., Izquierdo, E.: A probabilistic approach for
vision-based fire detection in videos. IEEE transactions on cir-
cuits and systems for video technology 20(5), 721–731 (2010)
16. Borges, P.V.K., Mayer, J., Izquierdo, E.: A probabilistic model
for flood detection in video sequences. In: Image Processing,
2008. ICIP 2008. 15th IEEE International Conference on, pp. 13–
16. IEEE (2008)
17. Bouguet, J.Y.: Pyramidal implementation of the affine Lucas-
Kanade feature tracker description of the algorithm. Intel Cor-
poration 5(1-10), 4 (2001)
18. Brox, T., Bruhn, A., Papenberg, N., Weickert, J.: High accuracy
optical flow estimation based on a theory for warping. In: Euro-
pean conference on computer vision, pp. 25–36. Springer (2004)
19. Brox, T., Malik, J.: Large displacement optical flow: descriptor
matching in variational motion estimation. IEEE transactions on
pattern analysis and machine intelligence 33(3), 500–513 (2011)
20. Buch, N., Velastin, S.A., Orwell, J.: A review of computer vision
techniques for the analysis of urban traffic. Intelligent Trans-
portation Systems, IEEE Transactions on 12(3), 920–939 (2011)
21. Calderara, S., Piccinini, P., Cucchiara, R.: Smoke detection in
video surveillance: a MoG model in the wavelet domain. In:
International conference on computer vision systems, pp. 119–
128. Springer (2008)
22. Castillo, C., Chang, C.: A method to detect victims in search and
rescue operations using template matching. In: Safety, Security
and Rescue Robotics, Workshop, 2005 IEEE International, pp.
201–206. IEEE (2005)
23. Celik, T.: Fast and efficient method for fire detection using image
processing. ETRI journal 32(6), 881–890 (2010)
24. Celik, T., Demirel, H.: Fire detection in video sequences using a
generic color model. Fire Safety Journal 44(2), 147–158 (2009)
25. C?etin, A.E., Dimitropoulos, K., Gouverneur, B., Grammalidis,
N., Gu?nay, O., Habiboglu, Y.H., To?reyin, B.U., Verstockt, S.:
Video fire detection–review. Digital Signal Processing 23(6),
1827–1843 (2013)
26. Chen, H.L., Tsai, M., Chan, C.: A Hidden Markov model-based
approach for recognizing swimmer’s behaviors in swimming
pool. In: 2010 International Conference on Machine Learning
and Cybernetics, vol. 5, pp. 2459–2465. IEEE (2010)
27. Chen, J., He, Y., Wang, J.: Multi-feature fusion based fast video
flame detection. Building and Environment 45(5), 1113–1122
(2010)
28. Chen, J., Kwong, K., Chang, D., Luk, J., Bajcsy, R.: Wearable
sensors for reliable fall detection. In: Engineering in Medicine
and Biology Society, pp. 3551–3554 (2005)
29. Chen, T.H., Wu, P.H., Chiou, Y.C.: An early fire-detection
method based on image processing. In: Image Processing, 2004.
ICIP’04. 2004 International Conference on, vol. 3, pp. 1707–
1710. IEEE (2004)
30. Chen, W.H., Cho, P.C., Fan, P.L., Yang, Y.W.: A framework
for vision-based swimmer tracking. In: Uncertainty Reasoning
and Knowledge Engineering (URKE), 2011 International Con-
ference on, vol. 1, pp. 44–47. IEEE (2011)
31. Choi, I.H., Kim, Y.G.: Head pose and gaze direction tracking for
detecting a drowsy driver. In: Big Data and Smart Computing
(BIGCOMP), 2014 International Conference on, pp. 241–244.
IEEE (2014)
32. Chong, Y.S., Tay, Y.H.: Abnormal event detection in videos us-
ing spatiotemporal autoencoder. In: International Symposium on
Neural Networks, pp. 189–196. Springer (2017)
33. Chua, J.L., Chang, Y.C., Lim, W.K.: A simple vision-based fall
detection technique for indoor video surveillance. Signal, Image
and Video Processing 9(3), 623–633 (2015)
34. Chunyu, Y., Jun, F., Jinjun, W., Yongming, Z.: Video fire smoke
detection using motion and color features. Fire Technology
46(3), 651–663 (2010)
35. Collins, R.T., Lipton, A.J., Kanade, T., Fujiyoshi, H., Duggins,
D., Tsin, Y., Tolliver, D., Enomoto, N., Hasegawa, O., Burt, P.,
et al.: A system for video surveillance and monitoring. Tech.
rep., Technical Report CMU-RI-TR-00-12, Robotics Institute,
Carnegie Mellon University (2000)
36. Dalal, N., Triggs, B.: Histograms of oriented gradients for hu-
man detection. In: 2005 IEEE Computer Society Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR’05), vol. 1, pp.
886–893. IEEE (2005)
37. Danescu, R., Nedevschi, S.: Probabilistic lane tracking in dif-
ficult road scenarios using stereovision. IEEE Transactions on
Intelligent Transportation Systems 10(2), 272–282 (2009)
38. Diem, L., Zaharieva, M.: Video content representation using re-
curring regions detection. In: International Conference on Mul-
timedia Modeling, pp. 16–28. Springer (2016)
39. Martinez-de Dios, J.R., Arrue, B.C., Ollero, A., Merino, L.,
Go?mez-Rodr??guez, F.: Computer vision techniques for forest fire
perception. Image and vision computing 26(4), 550–562 (2008)
40. Doerr, K.U., Hutchinson, T.C., Kuester, F.: A methodology for
image-based tracking of seismic-induced motions. In: Proc.
SPIE, vol. 5758, pp. 321–332 (2005)
41. Dollar, P., Wojek, C., Schiele, B., Perona, P.: Pedestrian detec-
tion: An evaluation of the state of the art. Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence, IEEE Transactions on 34(4), 743–761
(2012)
42. Eng, H., Toh, K., Kam, A.H., Wang, J., Yau, W.Y.: An auto-
matic drowning detection surveillance system for challenging
outdoor pool environments. In: Computer Vision, 2003. Pro-
ceedings. Ninth IEEE International Conference on, pp. 532–539.
IEEE (2003)
43. ESA: Sentinel 2 mission details (2014). URL
https://earth.esa.int/web/guest/missions/esa-
operational-eo-missions/sentinel-2
44. FATE: New fall detector arrives this september 2015 (2015).
URL http://fate.upc.edu/index.php
45. Fei, L., Xueli, W., Dongsheng, C.: Drowning detection based
on background subtraction. In: Embedded Software and Sys-
tems, 2009. ICESS’09. International Conference on, pp. 341–
343. IEEE (2009)
46. Forczman?ski, P., Nowosielski, A.: Multi-view data aggregation
for behaviour analysis in video surveillance systems. In: Inter-
national Conference on Computer Vision and Graphics, pp. 462–
473. Springer (2016)
22 Laura Lopez-Fuentes et al.
47. Foroughi, H., Aski, B.S., Pourreza, H.: Intelligent video surveil-
lance for monitoring fall detection of elderly in home environ-
ments. In: Computer and Information Technology, 2008. ICCIT
2008. 11th International Conference on, pp. 219–224 (2008)
48. Frizzi, S., Kaabi, R., Bouchouicha, M., Ginoux, J.M., Moreau,
E., Fnaiech, F.: Convolutional neural network for video fire and
smoke detection. In: Industrial Electronics Society, IECON
2016-42nd Annual Conference of the IEEE, pp. 877–882. IEEE
(2016)
49. Fu, Q., Banerjee, A., Liess, S., Snyder, P.K.: Drought detection of
the last century: An MRF-based approach. In: SDM, pp. 24–34.
SIAM (2012)
50. Gade, R., Moeslund, T.B.: Thermal cameras and applications: a
survey. Machine vision and applications 25(1), 245–262 (2014)
51. Garate, C., Bilinsky, P., Bremond, F.: Crowd event recognition
using HOG tracker. In: Performance Evaluation of Tracking and
Surveillance (PETS-Winter), 2009 Twelfth IEEE International
Workshop on, pp. 1–6. IEEE (2009)
52. Gautama, T., Van Hulle, M.: A phase-based approach to the es-
timation of the optical flow field using spatial filtering. IEEE
Transactions on Neural Networks 13(5), 1127–1136 (2002)
53. Gavrila, D.M., Munder, S.: Multi-cue pedestrian detection and
tracking from a moving vehicle. International journal of com-
puter vision 73(1), 41–59 (2007)
54. Geronimo, D., Lopez, A.M., Sappa, A.D., Graf, T.: Survey
of pedestrian detection for advanced driver assistance systems.
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis & Machine Intelligence
37(7), 1239–1258 (2009)
55. Gevers, T., Gijsenij, A., van de Weijer, J., Geusebroek, J.: Color
in Computer Vision: Fundamentals and Applications. Wiley
(2012)
56. Gomez-Rodriguez, F., Arrue, B., Ollero, A.: Smoke monitoring
and measurement using image processing: application to forest
fires. In: AeroSense 2003, pp. 404–411. International Society for
Optics and Photonics (2003)
57. Gonzalez-Gonzalez, R., Alarcon-Aquino, V., Romero, R.R.,
Starostenko, O., Rodriguez-Asomoza, J., Ramirez-Cortes, J.:
Wavelet-based smoke detection in outdoor video sequences. In:
Circuits and Systems (MWSCAS), 2010 53rd IEEE International
Midwest Symposium on, pp. 383–387. IEEE (2010)
58. Gope, S., Sarkar, S., Mitra, P., Ghosh, S.: Early Prediction of
Extreme Rainfall Events: A Deep Learning Approach, pp. 154–
167. Springer International Publishing, Cham (2016)
59. Grabisch, M., Murofushi, T., Sugeno, M.: Fuzzy Measures and
Integrals: Theory and Applications. Studies in Fuzziness and
Soft Computing. Physica-Verlag HD (2000)
60. Gubbi, J., Marusic, S., Palaniswami, M.: Smoke detection in
video using wavelets and support vector machines. Fire Safety
Journal 44(8), 1110–1115 (2009)
61. Gu?nay, O., Tas?demir, K., To?reyin, B.U., C?etin, A.E.: Fire detec-
tion in video using LMS based active learning. Fire technology
46(3), 551–577 (2010)
62. Guo, C., Mita, S., McAllester, D.: Robust road detection and
tracking in challenging scenarios based on Markov random fields
with unsupervised learning. Intelligent Transportation Systems,
IEEE Transactions on 13(3), 1338–1354 (2012)
63. Haar, A.: Zur theorie der orthogonalen funktionensysteme.
Mathematische Annalen 69(3), 331–371 (1910)
64. Hachisuka, S., Ishida, K., Enya, T., Kamijo, M.: Facial expres-
sion measurement for detecting driver drowsiness. In: Engi-
neering Psychology and Cognitive Ergonomics, pp. 135–144.
Springer (2011)
65. Harris, C., Stephens, M.: A combined corner and edge detector.
In: Proceedings of the 4th Alvey Vision Conference, pp. 147–151
(1988)
66. Hassan-Esfahani, L., Torres-Rua, A., Jensen, A., McKee, M.: As-
sessment of surface soil moisture using high-resolution multi-
spectral imagery and artificial neural networks. Remote Sensing
7(3), 2627–2646 (2015)
67. Hayashi, T., Yamada, K.: Predicting unusual right-turn driving
behavior at intersection. In: 2009 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Sym-
posium (2009)
68. Hazelhoff, L., Han, J., et al.: Video-based fall detection in the
home using principal component analysis. In: Advanced Con-
cepts for Intelligent Vision Systems, pp. 298–309. Springer
(2008)
69. Houben, S., Stallkamp, J., Salmen, J., Schlipsing, M., Igel, C.:
Detection of traffic signs in real-world images: The german traf-
fic sign detection benchmark. In: Neural Networks (IJCNN), The
2013 International Joint Conference on, pp. 1–8. IEEE (2013)
70. Hu, S., Zheng, G.: Driver drowsiness detection with eyelid re-
lated parameters by support vector machine. Expert Systems
with Applications 36(4), 7651–7658 (2009)
71. Hu, W., Xiao, X., Fu, Z., Xie, D., Tan, T., Maybank, S.: A sys-
tem for learning statistical motion patterns. IEEE transactions
on pattern analysis and machine intelligence 28(9), 1450–1464
(2006)
72. Huang, H., Liu, H., Zhang, L.: Videoweb: space-time aware pre-
sentation of a videoclip collection. IEEE Journal on Emerg-
ing and Selected Topics in Circuits and Systems 4(1), 142–152
(2014)
73. Hutchinson, T.C., Kuester, F.: Monitoring global earthquake-
induced demands using vision-based sensors. IEEE Transactions
on Instrumentation and Measurement 53(1), 31–36 (2004)
74. Ibraheem, N.A., Hasan, M.M., Khan, R.Z., Mishra, P.K.: Under-
standing color models: a review. ARPN Journal of Science and
Technology 2(3), 265–275 (2012)
75. Ihaddadene, N., Djeraba, C.: Real-time crowd motion analysis.
In: Pattern Recognition, 2008. ICPR 2008. 19th International
Conference on, pp. 1–4. IEEE (2008)
76. IHSTechnology: 245 million video surveillance cam-
eras installed globally in 2014 (2015). URL https:
//technology.ihs.com/532501/245-million-video-
surveillance-cameras-installed-globally-in-2014
77. Izadi, M., Saeedi, P.: Robust region-based background subtrac-
tion and shadow removing using color and gradient information.
In: 2008 19th International Conference on Pattern Recognition,
pp. 1–5 (2008)
78. Jiang, F., Yuan, J., Tsaftaris, S.A., Katsaggelos, A.K.: Anoma-
lous video event detection using spatiotemporal context. Com-
puter Vision and Image Understanding 115(3), 323–333 (2011)
79. Jiang, M., Chen, Y., Zhao, Y., Cai, A.: A real-time fall detection
system based on HMM and RVM. In: Visual Communications
and Image Processing (VCIP), 2013, pp. 1–6. IEEE (2013)
80. Juang, C.F., Chang, C.M.: Human body posture classification by
a neural fuzzy network and home care system application. IEEE
Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics - Part A: Sys-
tems and Humans 37(6), 984–994 (2007)
81. Juang, C.F., Lin, C.T.: An online self-constructing neural fuzzy
inference network and its applications. IEEE Transactions on
Fuzzy Systems 6(1), 12–32 (1998)
82. Kam, A.H., Lu, W., Yau, W.Y.: A video-based drowning detec-
tion system. In: European Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
297–311. Springer (2002)
83. Kamijo, S., Matsushita, Y., Ikeuchi, K., Sakauchi, M.: Traffic
monitoring and accident detection at intersections. Intelligent
Transportation Systems, IEEE Transactions on 1(2), 108–118
(2000)
84. Kang, B., Choo, H.: A deep-learning-based emergency alert sys-
tem. ICT Express 2(2), 67 – 70 (2016)
85. Kanistras, K., Martins, G., Rutherford, M.J., Valavanis, K.P.: Sur-
vey of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) for traffic monitoring.
Review on Computer Vision Techniques in Emergency Situations 23
In: Handbook of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles, pp. 2643–2666.
Springer (2015)
86. Ke, S.R., Thuc, H.L.U., Lee, Y.J., Hwang, J.N., Yoo, J.H.,
Choi, K.H.: A review on video-based human activity recognition.
Computers 2(2), 88–131 (2013)
87. Kim, K., Chalidabhongse, T.H., Harwood, D., Davis, L.:
Real-time foreground–background segmentation using codebook
model. Real-time imaging 11(3), 172–185 (2005)
88. Kleiner, A., Kummerle, R.: Genetic MRF model optimization for
real-time victim detection in search and rescue. In: Intelligent
Robots and Systems, 2007. IROS 2007. IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on, pp. 3025–3030. IEEE (2007)
89. Ko, B., Cheong, K.H., Nam, J.Y.: Early fire detection algorithm
based on irregular patterns of flames and hierarchical bayesian
networks. Fire Safety Journal 45(4), 262–270 (2010)
90. Kogan, F.N.: Droughts of the late 1980s in the United States as
derived from NOAA polar-orbiting satellite data. Bulletin of the
American Meteorological Society 76(5), 655–668 (1995)
91. Kolesov, I., Karasev, P., Tannenbaum, A., Haber, E.: Fire and
smoke detection in video with optimal mass transport based op-
tical flow and neural networks. In: 2010 IEEE International Con-
ference on Image Processing, pp. 761–764 (2010)
92. Kovacic, K., Ivanjko, E., Gold, H.: Computer vision systems in
road vehicles: a review. In: the Proceedings of the Croatian Com-
puter Vision Workshop (2013)
93. Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., Hinton, G.E.: Imagenet classifica-
tion with deep convolutional neural networks. In: Advances in
neural information processing systems, pp. 1097–1105 (2012)
94. Kumar, K.C., Bhowmick, B.: An application for driver drowsi-
ness identification based on pupil detection using IR camera. In:
Proceedings of the First International Conference on Intelligent
Human Computer Interaction, pp. 73–82. Springer (2009)
95. Lagerstrom, R., Arzhaeva, Y., Szul, P., Obst, O., Power, R.,
Robinson, B., Bednarz, T.: Image classification to support emer-
gency situation awareness. Frontiers in Robotics and AI 3, 54
(2016)
96. Lai, C., Yang, J., Chen, Y.: A real time video processing based
surveillance system for early fire and flood detection. In: Instru-
mentation and Measurement Technology Conference Proceed-
ings, 2007. IMTC 2007. IEEE, pp. 1–6. IEEE (2007)
97. LeCun, Y., Boser, B.E., Denker, J.S., Henderson, D., Howard,
R.E., Hubbard, W.E., Jackel, L.D.: Handwritten digit recognition
with a back-propagation network. In: Advances in neural infor-
mation processing systems, pp. 396–404 (1990)
98. Lee, B.G., Jung, S.J., Chung, W.Y.: Real-time physiological and
vision monitoring of vehicle driver for non-intrusive drowsiness
detection. IET communications 5(17), 2461–2469 (2011)
99. Leira, F.S., Johansen, T.A., Fossen, T.I.: Automatic detection,
classification and tracking of objects in the ocean surface from
UAVs using a thermal camera. In: Aerospace Conference, 2015
IEEE, pp. 1–10. IEEE (2015)
100. Li, L., Huang, W., Gu, I.Y., Tian, Q.: Foreground object detection
from videos containing complex background. In: Proceedings of
the eleventh ACM international conference on Multimedia, pp.
2–10. ACM (2003)
101. Liao, Y.T., Huang, C.L., Hsu, S.C.: Slip and fall event detection
using Bayesian belief network. Pattern recognition 45(1), 24–32
(2012)
102. Lin, C.W., Ling, Z.H.: Automatic fall incident detection in com-
pressed video for intelligent homecare. In: Computer Communi-
cations and Networks, 2007. ICCCN 2007. Proceedings of 16th
International Conference on, pp. 1172–1177. IEEE (2007)
103. Lopez-Fuentes, L., Bagdanov, A.D., van de Weijer, J., Skin-
nemoen, H.: Bandwidth limited object recognition in high res-
olution imagery. In: Applications of Computer Vision (WACV),
2017 IEEE Winter Conference on, pp. 1197–1205. IEEE (2017)
104. Lu, W., Tan, Y.P.: A vision-based approach to early detection of
drowning incidents in swimming pools. IEEE transactions on
circuits and systems for video technology 14(2), 159–178 (2004)
105. Lu, Y.M., Do, M.N.: Multidimensional directional filter banks
and surfacelets. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 16(4),
918–931 (2007)
106. Lucas, B.D., Kanade, T., et al.: An iterative image registration
technique with an application to stereo vision. International Joint
Conference on Artificial Intelligence 81(1), 674–679 (1981)
107. Ma, J., Murphey, Y.L., Zhao, H.: Real time drowsiness detection
based on lateral distance using wavelet transform and neural net-
work. In: Computational Intelligence, 2015 IEEE Symposium
Series on, pp. 411–418. IEEE (2015)
108. Maalel, N., Natalizio, E., Bouabdallah, A., Roux, P., Kellil, M.:
Reliability for emergency applications in internet of things. In:
Distributed Computing in Sensor Systems (DCOSS), 2013 IEEE
International Conference On, pp. 361–366. IEEE (2013)
109. Maksymiv, O., Rak, T., Menshikova, O.: Deep convolutional net-
work for detecting probable emergency situations. In: IEEE First
International Conference on Data Stream Mining & Processing
(DSMP), pp. 199–202. IEEE (2016)
110. Mallat, S.G.: A theory for multiresolution signal decomposition:
the wavelet representation. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis
and machine intelligence 11(7), 674–693 (1989)
111. Martinis, S.: Automatic near real-time flood detection in high
resolution x-band synthetic aperture radar satellite data using
context-based classification on irregular graphs. Ph.D. thesis,
lmu (2010)
112. Mason, D.C., Davenport, I.J., Neal, J.C., Schumann, G.J.P.,
Bates, P.D.: Near real-time flood detection in urban and rural ar-
eas using high-resolution synthetic aperture radar images. Geo-
science and Remote Sensing, IEEE Transactions on 50(8), 3041–
3052 (2012)
113. Mason, D.C., Speck, R., Devereux, B., Schumann, G.J., Neal,
J.C., Bates, P.D.: Flood detection in urban areas using TerraSAR-
X. Geoscience and Remote Sensing, IEEE Transactions on 48(2),
882–894 (2010)
114. Medel, J.R., Savakis, A.: Anomaly detection in video using pre-
dictive convolutional long short-term memory networks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1612.00390 (2016)
115. Mehran, R., Oyama, A., Shah, M.: Abnormal crowd behavior de-
tection using social force model. In: Computer Vision and Pat-
tern Recognition, 2009. CVPR 2009. IEEE Conference on, pp.
935–942. IEEE (2009)
116. Mirmahboub, B., Samavi, S., Karimi, N., Shirani, S.: Automatic
monocular system for human fall detection based on variations
in silhouette area. Biomedical Engineering, IEEE Transactions
on 60(2), 427–436 (2013)
117. Mobileeye: Pedestrian detection (2014). URL http://www.
mobileye.com/technology/applications/pedestrian-
detection/
118. Mogelmose, A., Liu, D., Trivedi, M.M.: Traffic sign detection
for us roads: Remaining challenges and a case for tracking. In:
Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC), 2014 IEEE 17th In-
ternational Conference on, pp. 1394–1399. IEEE (2014)
119. Muscio, A., Corticelli, M.A.: Land mine detection by infrared
thermography: reduction of size and duration of the experiments.
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 42(9),
1955–1964 (2004)
120. Nagatani, K., Kiribayashi, S., Okada, Y., Otake, K., Yoshida,
K., Tadokoro, S., Nishimura, T., Yoshida, T., Koyanagi, E.,
Fukushima, M., et al.: Emergency response to the nuclear acci-
dent at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plants using mobile
rescue robots. Journal of Field Robotics 30(1), 44–63 (2013)
121. Petak, W.J.: Emergency management: A challenge for public ad-
ministration. Public Administration Review 45, 3–7 (1985)
24 Laura Lopez-Fuentes et al.
122. Piccardi, M.: Background subtraction techniques: a review. In:
Systems, man and cybernetics, 2004 IEEE international confer-
ence on, vol. 4, pp. 3099–3104. IEEE (2004)
123. Piciarelli, C., Micheloni, C., Foresti, G.L.: Trajectory-based
anomalous event detection. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and
Systems for video Technology 18(11), 1544–1554 (2008)
124. Price, J., Maraviglia, C., Seisler, W., Williams, E., Pauli, M.: Sys-
tem capabilities, requirements and design of the GDL gunfire de-
tection and location system. In: Information Theory, 2004. ISIT
2004. Proceedings. International Symposium on, pp. 257–262.
IEEE (2004)
125. Rabiner, L., Juang, B.: An introduction to hidden Markov mod-
els. IEEE ASSP magazine 3(1), 4–16 (1986)
126. Radianti, J., Granmo, O.C., Bouhmala, N., Sarshar, P., Yazidi,
A., Gonzalez, J.: Crowd models for emergency evacuation: A
review targeting human-centered sensing. In: System Sciences
(HICSS), 2013 46th Hawaii International Conference on, pp.
156–165. IEEE (2013)
127. Reisinger, K.S.: Smoke detectors: reducing deaths and injuries
due to fire. Pediatrics 65(4), 718–724 (1980)
128. Rinsurongkawong, S., Ekpanyapong, M., Dailey, M.N.: Fire de-
tection for early fire alarm based on optical flow video process-
ing. In: Electrical engineering/electronics, computer, telecom-
munications and information technology (ecti-con), 2012 9th in-
ternational conference on, pp. 1–4. IEEE (2012)
129. Rougier, C., Auvinet, E., Rousseau, J., Mignotte, M., Meunier,
J.: Fall detection from depth map video sequences. In: Toward
useful services for elderly and people with disabilities, pp. 121–
128. Springer (2011)
130. Rougier, C., Meunier, J., St-Arnaud, A., Rousseau, J.: Fall detec-
tion from human shape and motion history using video surveil-
lance. In: Advanced Information Networking and Applications
Workshops, 2007, AINAW’07. 21st International Conference on,
vol. 2, pp. 875–880. IEEE (2007)
131. Rudol, P., Doherty, P.: Human body detection and geolocaliza-
tion for UAV search and rescue missions using color and thermal
imagery. In: Aerospace Conference, 2008 IEEE, pp. 1–8. IEEE
(2008)
132. Sabokrou, M., Fayyaz, M., Fathy, M., et al.: Fully convolutional
neural network for fast anomaly detection in crowded scenes.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.00866 (2016)
133. Sakour, I., Hu, H.: Robot-assisted crowd evacuation under emer-
gency situations: A survey. Robotics 6(2), 8 (2017)
134. Saligrama, V., Chen, Z.: Video anomaly detection based on local
statistical aggregates. In: Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion (CVPR), 2012 IEEE Conference on, pp. 2112–2119. IEEE
(2012)
135. Schoeffmann, K., Hudelist, M.A., Huber, J.: Video interaction
tools: A survey of recent work. ACM Computing Surveys
(CSUR) 48(1), 14 (2015)
136. Shah, B., Choset, H.: Survey on urban search and rescue robots.
Journal of the Robotics Society of Japan 22(5), 582–586 (2004)
137. Shieh, W.Y., Huang, J.C.: Falling-incident detection and through-
put enhancement in a multi-camera video-surveillance system.
Medical engineering & physics 34(7), 954–963 (2012)
138. Siegel, R.: Land mine detection. IEEE instrumentation & mea-
surement magazine 5(4), 22–28 (2002)
139. Sixsmith, A., Johnson, N.: A smart sensor to detect the falls of
the elderly. IEEE Pervasive Computing 3(2), 42–47 (2004)
140. Song, Y., Njoroge, J.B., Morimoto, Y.: Drought impact assess-
ment from monitoring the seasonality of vegetation condition
using long-term time-series satellite images: a case study of Mt.
Kenya region. Environmental monitoring and assessment 185(5),
4117–4124 (2013)
141. Soni, B., Sowmya, A.: Classifier ensemble with incremen-
tal learning for disaster victim detection. In: Robotics and
Biomimetics (ROBIO), 2012 IEEE International Conference on,
pp. 446–451. IEEE (2012)
142. Soni, B., Sowmya, A.: Victim detection and localisation in an
urban disaster site. In: Robotics and Biomimetics (ROBIO), 2013
IEEE International Conference on, pp. 2142–2147. IEEE (2013)
143. Stauffer, C., Grimson, W.E.L.: Learning patterns of activity using
real-time tracking. IEEE Transactions on pattern analysis and
machine intelligence 22(8), 747–757 (2000)
144. Suard, F., Rakotomamonjy, A., Bensrhair, A., Broggi, A.: Pedes-
trian detection using infrared images and histograms of oriented
gradients. In: 2006 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium, pp.
206–212. IEEE (2006)
145. Sultani, W., Choi, J.Y.: Abnormal traffic detection using intelli-
gent driver model. In: Pattern Recognition (ICPR), 2010 20th
International Conference on, pp. 324–327. IEEE (2010)
146. transportation Systems, F.I.: Vehicle, pedestrian, bicycle pres-
ence sensors (2016). URL http://www.flir.eu/traffic/
display/?id=62100
147. Thome, N., Miguet, S., Ambellouis, S.: A real-time, multiview
fall detection system: A LHMM-Based approach. IEEE Trans-
actions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology 18(11),
1522–1532 (2008)
148. Tian, H., Li, W., Ogunbona, P., Nguyen, D.T., Zhan, C.: Smoke
detection in videos using non-redundant local binary pattern-
based features. In: Multimedia Signal Processing (MMSP), 2011
IEEE 13th International Workshop on, pp. 1–4. IEEE (2011)
149. Tompkin, J., Kim, K.I., Kautz, J., Theobalt, C.: Videoscapes: ex-
ploring sparse, unstructured video collections. ACM Transac-
tions on Graphics (TOG) 31(4), 68 (2012)
150. Toreyin, B.U., Dedeoglu, Y., Cetin, A.E.: HMM based falling
person detection using both audio and video. In: 2006 IEEE
14th Signal Processing and Communications Applications, pp.
1–4 (2006)
151. To?reyin, B.U., Dedeog?lu, Y., Gu?du?kbay, U., Cetin, A.E.: Com-
puter vision based method for real-time fire and flame detection.
Pattern recognition letters 27(1), 49–58 (2006)
152. Trivedi, M.M., Gandhi, T., McCall, J.: Looking-in and looking-
out of a vehicle: Computer-vision-based enhanced vehicle safety.
Intelligent Transportation Systems, IEEE Transactions on 8(1),
108–120 (2007)
153. Truong, T.X., Kim, J.M.: Fire flame detection in video sequences
using multi-stage pattern recognition techniques. Engineering
Applications of Artificial Intelligence 25(7), 1365–1372 (2012)
154. U.S. Department of Transportation: Traffic safety facts (2015).
URL https://crashstats.nhtsa.dot.gov/Api/Public/
ViewPublication/812115
155. Utasi, A?., Benedek, C.: A multi-view annotation tool for peo-
ple detection evaluation. In: Proceedings of the 1st International
Workshop on Visual Interfaces for Ground Truth Collection in
Computer Vision Applications, p. 3. ACM (2012)
156. Van Hamme, D., Veelaert, P., Philips, W., Teelen, K.: Fire detec-
tion in color images using Markov random fields. In: Interna-
tional Conference on Advanced Concepts for Intelligent Vision
Systems, pp. 88–97. Springer (2010)
157. Veeraraghavan, H., Masoud, O., Papanikolopoulos, N.P.: Com-
puter vision algorithms for intersection monitoring. Intelli-
gent Transportation Systems, IEEE Transactions on 4(2), 78–89
(2003)
158. Viola, P., Jones, M.J.: Robust real-time face detection. Interna-
tional journal of computer vision 57(2), 137–154 (2004)
159. Violence, W.H.O., Prevention, I., Organization, W.H.: Global sta-
tus report on road safety 2015. World Health Organization (2015)
160. Wang, H., Finn, A., Erdinc, O., Vincitore, A.: Spatial-temporal
structural and dynamics features for video fire detection. In: Ap-
plications of Computer Vision (WACV), 2013 IEEE Workshop
on, pp. 513–519. IEEE (2013)
161. Wang, J.t., Chen, D.b., Chen, H.y., Yang, J.y.: On pedestrian de-
tection and tracking in infrared videos. Pattern Recognition Let-
ters 33(6), 775–785 (2012)
Review on Computer Vision Techniques in Emergency Situations 25
162. Wang, S., He, Y., Zou, J.J., Zhou, D., Wang, J.: Early smoke de-
tection in video using swaying and diffusion feature. Journal of
Intelligent & Fuzzy Systems 26(1), 267–275 (2014)
163. Wang, T., Snoussi, H.: Histograms of optical flow orientation
for visual abnormal events detection. In: Advanced Video and
Signal-Based Surveillance (AVSS), 2012 IEEE Ninth Interna-
tional Conference on, pp. 13–18. IEEE (2012)
164. Wasaki, K., Shimoi, N., Takita, Y., Kawamoto, P.N.: A smart
sensing method for mine detection using time difference IR im-
ages. In: Multisensor Fusion and Integration for Intelligent Sys-
tems, 2001. MFI 2001. International Conference on, pp. 133–
139. IEEE (2001)
165. Wojek, C., Walk, S., Schiele, B.: Multi-cue onboard pedestrian
detection. In: Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2009.
CVPR 2009. IEEE Conference on, pp. 794–801. IEEE (2009)
166. Xiong, Z., Caballero, R., Wang, H., Finn, A.M., Lelic, M.A.,
Peng, P.Y.: Video-based smoke detection: possibilities, tech-
niques, and challenges. In: IFPA, fire suppression and detec-
tion research and applications—a technical working conference
(SUPDET), Orlando, FL (2007)
167. Xu, G., Zhang, Y., Zhang, Q., Lin, G., Wang, J.: Deep domain
adaptation based video smoke detection using synthetic smoke
images. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.10729 (2017)
168. Xu, Z., Xu, J.: Automatic fire smoke detection based on image vi-
sual features. In: Computational Intelligence and Security Work-
shops, 2007. CISW 2007. International Conference on, pp. 316–
319. IEEE (2007)
169. Xu, Z., Xu, J.: Automatic fire smoke detection based on image vi-
sual features. In: Computational Intelligence and Security Work-
shops, 2007. CISW 2007. International Conference on, pp. 316–
319 (2007)
170. Yamato, J., Ohya, J., Ishii, K.: Recognizing human action in
time-sequential images using hidden Markov model. In: Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, 1992. Proceedings CVPR
’92., 1992 IEEE Computer Society Conference on, pp. 379–385
(1992). DOI 10.1109/CVPR.1992.223161
171. Yang, L., Yang, S.H., Plotnick, L.: How the internet of things
technology enhances emergency response operations. Techno-
logical Forecasting and Social Change 80(9), 1854–1867 (2013)
172. Ye, W., Zhao, J., Wang, S., Wang, Y., Zhang, D., Yuan, Z.: Dy-
namic texture based smoke detection using surfacelet transform
and hmt model. Fire Safety Journal 73, 91–101 (2015)
173. Yilmaz, A., Javed, O., Shah, M.: Object tracking: A survey. Acm
computing surveys (CSUR) 38(4), 13 (2006)
174. Yu, C., Mei, Z., Zhang, X.: A real-time video fire flame and
smoke detection algorithm. Procedia Engineering 62, 891–898
(2013)
175. Yuan, F.: Video-based smoke detection with histogram sequence
of LBP and LBPV pyramids. Fire Safety Journal 46(3), 132–139
(2011)
176. Yun, K., Jeong, H., Yi, K.M., Kim, S.W., Choi, J.Y.: Motion in-
teraction field for accident detection in traffic surveillance video.
In: 2014 22nd International Conference on Pattern Recognition
(ICPR), pp. 3062–3067. IEEE (2014)
177. Zadeh, L.A.: Fuzzy sets. Information and Control 8(3), 338–353
(1965)
178. Zadeh, L.A.: Outline of a new approach to the analysis of com-
plex systems and decision processes. IEEE Transactions on Sys-
tems, Man, and Cybernetics SMC-3(1), 28–44 (1973)
179. Zaklouta, F., Stanciulescu, B.: Warning traffic sign recognition
using a HOG-based Kd tree. In: Intelligent Vehicles Symposium
(IV), 2011 IEEE, pp. 1019–1024. IEEE (2011)
180. Zecha, D., Greif, T., Lienhart, R.: Swimmer detection and
pose estimation for continuous stroke-rate determination. In:
IS&T/SPIE Electronic Imaging, pp. 830,410–830,410. Interna-
tional Society for Optics and Photonics (2012)
181. Zhang, Q., Xu, J., Xu, L., Guo, H.: Deep convolutional neural
networks for forest fire detection. In: Proceedings of the 2016
International Forum on Management, Education and Information
Technology Application. Atlantis Press (2016)
182. Zhang, T., Wang, J., Xu, L., Liu, P.: Fall detection by wearable
sensor and one-class SVM algorithm. In: Intelligent comput-
ing in signal processing and pattern recognition, pp. 858–863.
Springer (2006)
183. Zhou, S., Shen, W., Zeng, D., Fang, M., Wei, Y., Zhang, Z.:
Spatial–temporal convolutional neural networks for anomaly de-
tection and localization in crowded scenes. Signal Processing:
Image Communication 47, 358–368 (2016)
