ar
X
iv
:1
70
8.
07
58
0v
1 
 [
cs
.G
T
] 
 2
5 
A
ug
 2
01
7
Working Paper
Achieving Proportional Representation via Voting
Haris Aziz · Barton Lee
Abstract Proportional representation (PR) is often discussed in voting settings as a
major desideratum. For the past century or so, it is common both in practice and in
the academic literature to jump to STV (Single Transferable Vote) as the solution for
achieving PR. Some of the most prominent electoral reform movements around the
globe are pushing for the adoption of STV.
It has been termed a major open problem to design a voting rule that satisfies the
same PR properties as STV and better monotonicity properties. We present a rule
called EAR (Expanding Approvals Rule) that satisfies properties stronger than the
central PR axiom satisfied by STV, can handle indifferences in a convenient and com-
putationally efficient manner, and also satisfies better candidate monotonicity proper-
ties. In view of this, our proposed rule seems to be a compelling solution for achieving
proportional representation in voting settings.
Keywords committee selection · multiwinner voting · proportional representation ·
single transferable vote.
JEL Classification: C70 · D61 · D71
1 Introduction
Of all modes in which a national representation can possibly be constituted,
this one [STV] affords the best security for the intellectual qualifications de-
sirable in the representatives—John Stuart Mill (Considerations on Represen-
tative Government, 1861).
A major unsolved problem is whether there exist rules that retain the impor-
tant political features of STV and are also more monotonic—Woodall (1997).
H. Aziz · B. Lee
Data61, CSIRO and UNSW, Sydney 2052 , Australia
Tel.: +61-2-8306 0490
Fax: +61-2-8306 0405
E-mail: {haris.aziz,barton.lee}@unsw.edu.au
2 Haris Aziz, Barton Lee
We consider a well-studied voting setting in which n voters express ordinal prefer-
ences over m candidates and based on the preferences k ? m candidates are selected.
The candidates may or may not be from particular parties but voters express prefer-
ences directly over individual candidates.1 This kind of voting problem is not only
encountered in parliamentary elections but to form any kind of representative body.
When making such a selection by a voting rule, a desirable requirement is that of
proportional representation. Proportional representation stipulates that voters should
get representation in a committee or parliament according to the strengths of their
numbers. It is widely accepted that proportional representation is the fairest way to
reflect the diversity of opinions among the voters.2
For the last 120 years or so, the most widely used and accepted way to achieve it
is via STV—single transferable vote (Black, 1958; Tideman and Richardson, 2000)
and its several variants. In fact STV is used for elections in several countries in-
cluding Australia, Ireland, India, and Pakistan. It is also used to select representative
committees in hundreds of settings including professional organisations, scientific or-
ganizations, political parties, schools groups, and university student councils all over
the globe.3
The reason for the widespread adoption of STV is partly due to the fact that it
has been promoted to satisfy proportional representation axioms. In particular, STV
satisfies a key PR axiom called PSC which is the abbreviation for Proportionality for
Solid Coalition (Tideman and Richardson, 2000; Woodall, 1994). Tideman (1995)
argues that “It is the fact that STV satisfies PSC that justifies describing STV as a
system of proportional representation.” Woodall (1997) also calls the property the
“essential feature of STV, which makes it a system of proportional representation.”
Dummett (1984) motivated PSC as a minority not requiring to coordinate its report
and that it should deserve some high preferred candidates to be selected as long as
enough voters are ‘solidly committed to such candidates.’ PSC captures the idea that
as long as voters have the same top candidates (possibly in different ordering), they
do not need to coordinate their preferences to get a justified number of such candi-
dates selected. Voters from the same party not having to coordinate their reports as to
maximize the number of winners from their own party can be viewed as a weak form
of group-strategyproofness. PSC can also be seen as a voter’s vote not being wasted
due to lack of coordination with like-minded voters. PSC has been referred to as “a
sine qua non for a fair election rule” by Woodall (1994). 4
Although STV is not necessarily the only rule satisfying PR properties, it is syn-
onymous with proportional representation in academia and policy circles. The out-
1 The setting is referred to as a preferential voting system.
2 Proportional representation may be the fairest way for representation but it also allows for extreme
group to have some representation at least when the group is large enough. PR also need not be the most
effective approach to a stable government. Black (1958) wrote that “It [PR] makes it difficult to form a
cabinet which can command a parliamentary majority and so makes for weak government.”
3 Notable uses of STV include Oscar nominations, internal elections of the British Liberal Democrats,
and selection of Oxford Union, Cambridge Union, and Harvard/Radcliffe Undergraduate Councils.
4 There are two PSC axioms that differ in only whether the Hare quota is used or whether the Droop
quota is used. The one with respect to the Droop quota has also been referred to as DPC (Droop’s propor-
tionality criterion) (Woodall, 1994). Woodall (1994) went as far as saying that “I assume that no member
of the Electoral Reform Society will be satisfied with anything that does not satisfy DPC.”
Achieving Proportional Representation via Voting 3
come of STV can also be computed efficiently which makes it suitable for large scale
elections. Another reason for the adoption of STV is historical. Key figures proposed
ideas related to STV or pushed for the adoption of STV. The ideas behind STV can
be attributed to several thinkers including C. Andrae, T. Hare, H. R. Droop, and T. W.
Hill. For a detailed history of the development of STV family of rules, please see the
article by Tideman (1995). In a booklet, Aiyar (1930) explains the rationale behind
different components of the STV rule. STV was supported by influential intellectu-
als such as John Stuart Mill who placed STV “among the greatest improvements yet
made in the theory and practice of government.” Bowler and Grofman (2000) note
the British influence on the spread of STV among countries with historical associa-
tion with Great Britain.
With historical, normative, and computational motivation behind it, STV has be-
come the ‘go to’ rule for PR and has strong support.5 It is also vigorously promoted
by prominent electoral reform movements across the globe including the Proportional
Representation Society of Australia (http://www.prsa.org.au) and the Electoral
Reform Society (https://www.electoral-reform.org.uk).
Despite the central position of STV, it is not without some flaws. It is well-
understood that it violates basic monotonicity properties even when selecting a single
candidate (see e.g., Zwicker, 2016). Increasing the ranking of the winning candidate
may result in the candidate not getting selected. STV is also typically defined for
strict preferences which limits its ability to tackle more general weak orders. There
are several settings where voters may be indifferent between two candidates because
the candidates have the same characteristics that the voter cares about. It could also
be that the voter does not have the cognitive power or time to distinguish between two
candidates and does not wish to break ties arbitrarily. It is not clearly resolved in the
literature how STV can be extended to handle weak orders without compromising on
its computational efficiency or some of the desirable axiomatic properties it satisfies.6
The backdrop of this paper is that improving upon STV in terms of both PR as well
as monotonicity has been posed as a major challenge (Woodall, 1997).
Contributions We propose a new voting rule called EAR (Expanding Approvals Rule)
that has several advantages. (1) It satisfies an axiom called Generalised PSC that is
stronger than PSC. (2) It satisfies some natural monotonicity criteria that are not
satisfied by STV. (3) It is defined on general weak preferences rather than just for
strict preferences and hence constitutes a flexible and general rule that finds a suitable
outcome in polynomial time for both strict and dichotomous preferences. Efficient
computation of a rule is an important concern when we deal with election of large
committees.
5 One notable exception was philosopher Michael Dummett who was a stringent critic of STV. He pro-
posed a rival PR method called the Quota Borda System (QBS) and pushed its case (Dummett, 1984, 1997).
However, even he agreed that in terms of achieving PR, “[STV] guarantees representation for minorities
to the greatest degree to which any possible electoral system is capable of doing” (page 137, Dummett,
1997).
6 Hill (2001) and Meek (1994) propose one way to handle indifferences but which leads to an algorithm
that may take time O(m!).
4 Haris Aziz, Barton Lee
Our work also helps understand the specifications under which different variants
of STV satisfy different PR axioms. Apart from understanding how far STV and
EAR satisfy PR axioms, one of the conceptual contributions of this paper is to define
a taxonomy of PR axioms based on PSC and identify their relations with each other.
In particular, we propose a new axiom for weak preferences called Generalised PSC
that simultaneously generalises PSC (for strict preferences) and proportional justified
representation (for dichotomous preferences).
2 Model and Axioms
In this section, we lay the groundwork of the paper by first defining the model and
then formalizing the central axioms by which proportional representation rules are
judged.
2.1 Model
We consider the standard social choice setting with a set of voters N = {1, . . . , n}, a
set of candidates C = {c1, . . . , cm} and a preference profile %= (%1, . . . ,%n) such that
each %i is a complete and transitive relation over C. Based on the preference profile,
the goal is to select a committee W ? C of size k. Since our new rule is defined over
weak orders rather than strict orders, we allow the voters to express weak orders.
We write a %i b to denote that voter i values candidate a at least as much as
candidate b and use ?i for the strict part of %i, i.e., a ?i b iff a %i b but not b %i a.
Finally, ?i denotes i’s indifference relation, i.e., a ?i b if and only if both a %i b
and b %i a. The relation %i results in equivalence classes E
1
i
, E2
i
, . . . , E
ki
i
for some
ki such that a ?i a
? if and only if a ? El
i
and a? ? El
?
i
for some l < l?. Often, we
will use these equivalence classes to represent the preference relation of a voter as
a preference list i : E1
i
, E2
i
, . . . , E
ki
i
. If candidate c is in E
j
i
, we say it has rank j in
voter i’s preference. For example, we will denote the preferences a ?i b ?i c by the
list i : {a, b}, {c}. If each equivalence is of size 1, the preferences will be called
strict preferences or linear orders. Strict preferences will be represented by a comma
separated list of candidates. If for each voter, the number of equivalence classes is
at most two, the preferences are referred to as dichotomous preferences. When the
preferences of the voters are dichotomous, the voters can be seen as approving a
subset of voters. In this case for each voter i ? N, the first equivalence class E1
i
is
also referred to as the approval set Ai. The vector A = (A1, . . . , An) is referred to as
the ballot profile.
The model allows for voters to express preference lists that do not include some
candidates. In that case, the candidates not included in the list will be assumed to
form the last equivalence class.
Achieving Proportional Representation via Voting 5
2.2 PR under Strict Preferences
In order to understand the suitability of voting rules for proportional representation,
we recap the central PR axiom from the literature. It was first mentioned and popu-
larised by Dummett (1984). It is defined for strict preferences.
Definition 1 (Solid coalition) A set of voters N? is a solid coalition for a set of
candidates C? if every voter in N? ranks (strictly prefers) every candidates in C? ahead
of every candidate in C\C?. That is, for all i ? N? and for any c? ? C?
?c ? C\C? c? ?i c.
Definition 2 (q-PSC) Let W be an election outcome, q-PSC is satisfied if for all solid
coalitions N? of size |N?| ? ?q supporting candidate subset C? then
|W ?C?| ? min{?, |C?|}.
If q = n/k, then we refer to the property as Hare-PSC. If q = n/(k + 1) + ? for
small ? > 0 , then we refer to the property as Droop-PSC.7
There are some reasons to prefer the ‘Droop’ quota n/(k + 1) + ? for small ? > 0.
Firstly, for k = 1 the use of the Droop quota leads to rules that return a candidate
that is most preferred by more than half of the voters. Secondly, STV defined with
respect to the Droop quota ensures slight majorities get slight majority representa-
tion. Hare-PSC was stated as an essential property that a rule designed for PR should
satisfy (Dummett, 1984). Droop-PSC is referred to as the Droop Proportionality Cri-
terion in the literature. When preferences are strict and k = 1, Woodall (1997) refers
to the restriction of Droop-PSC under these conditions as the majority principle. The
majority principle requires that if a majority of voters are solidly committed to a set
of candidates, then one of the candidates must be selected.
Remark 1 If N? is a solid coalition for C? with |N?| > n/2 then C? is a Condorcet
committee according to Gehrlein (1985).
Example 1 Consider the profile with 9 voters and where k = 3. Then the voters
in set N? = {1, 2, 3} form a solid coalition with respect to Hare quota who solidly
support candidates in {c1, c2, c3, c4}. The voters in set N
?? = {4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9} form a
solid coalition with respect to Hare quota who solidly support three candidate subsets
7 Droop PSC is also referred to as Droop’s proportionality criterion (DPC). Technically speaking the
Droop quota is ?n/(k + 1)? + 1. The exact value n/(k + 1) is referred to as the Hagenbach-Bischoff quota.
6 Haris Aziz, Barton Lee
{e1}, {e1, e2} and {e1, e2, e3}.
1 : c1, c2, c3, c4, ...
2 : c4, c1, c2, c3, ...
3 : c2, c3, c4, c1, ...
4 : e1, e2, e3, ...
5 : e1, e2, e3, ...
6 : e1, e2, e3, ...
7 : e1, e2, e3, ...
8 : e1, e2, e3, ...
9 : e2, e1, e3, ...
One can also define a weak version of PSC. In some works (see eg Elkind et al.,
2014, 2017; Faliszewski et al., 2017), the weaker version has been attributed to the
original definition of PSC as defined by Dummett.
Definition 3 (weak q-PSC) Let W be an election outcome, weak q-PSC is satisfied
if for all solid coalitions N? of size |N?| ? ?q supporting a candidate subset C? with
|C?| ? ? then
|W ?C?| ? min{?, |C?|}.
Note that q-PSC implies weak q-PSC but the reverse need not hold. We also note
that under strict preferences and k = 1, if a majority of the voters have the same most
preferred candidate, then Weak Droop-PSC implies that the candidate is selected.
We will generalise the PSC property to weak preferences which has not been done
in the literature.
2.3 Candidate Monotoncity Axioms
PR captures the requirement that cohesive groups of voters should get sufficient rep-
resentation. Another desirable property is candidate monotonicity that requires that
increased support for a candidate should result in increased chance of the candidate
being selected. Candidate monotonicity involves the notion of a candidate being re-
inforced. We say a candidate is reinforced if its relative preference is improved while
not changing the relative preferences of all other candidates. We are now in a po-
sition to define standard candidate monotonicity properties of voting rules (see e.g.,
Elkind et al., 2017; Sanver and Zwicker, 2012). The definitions apply not just to strict
preferences but also to weak preferences.
Definition 4 (Candidate Monotonicity)
– Candidate Monotonicity (CM): if a winning candidate is reinforced, it remains a
winning candidate.
Achieving Proportional Representation via Voting 7
– Rank Respecting Candidate Monotonicity (RRCM): if a winning candidate c is
reinforced without changing the respective ranks of other winning candidates in
each voter’s preferences, then c remains a winning candidate.
– Non-Crossing Candidate Monotonicity (NCCM): if a winning candidate c is re-
inforced without ever crossing over another winning candidate, then c remains a
winning candidate.
– Weak Candidate Monotonicity (WCM): if a winning candidate is reinforced, then
some winning candidate still remains winning.
NCCM and WCM are extremely weak properties but STV violates them even for
k = 1. We observe the following relations between the properties.
Proposition 1 The following relations hold.
– CM =? RRCM =? NCCM
– CM =? WCM
– Under k = 1, RRCM is equivalent to CM
– Under dichotomous preferences, RRCM is equivalent to CM.
Note that if a rule fails CM for k = 1, then it also fails RRCM, NCCM, and WCM.
3 PR under generalised preference relations
The notion of a solid coalition and PSC can be generalised to the case of weak pref-
erences. In this section, we propose a new axiom called generalised PSC which not
only generalises PSC (that is only defined for strict preferences) but also PJR (pro-
portional justified representation) a PR axiom that is only defined for dichotomous
preferences.
Definition 5 ((Generalised) solid coalition) A set of voters N? is a (generalised)
solid coalition for a set of candidates C? if every voter in N? ranks (weakly prefers)
every candidates in C? at least as high as every candidate in C\C?. That is, for all
i ? N? and for any c? ? C?
?c ? C\C? c? %i c.
Definition 6 ((Generalised) q-PSC) Let W be an election outcome, (generalised) q-
PSC is satisfied if for all (generalised) solid coalitions N? of size |N?| ? ?q supporting
candidate subset C? then there exists a set C?? ? W with size at least min{?, |C?|} such
that for all c?? ? C??
?i ? N? : c?? %i c
(i,|C? |),
where c(i,|C
? |) denotes voter i’s |C?|-th most preferred candidate.
When q = n/k this defines the (generalised) Hare quota, when q = n/(k + 1) + ?
for small ? > 0 this defines the (generalised) Droop quota.
The following example shows that generalised q-PSC is a weak property when
solid coalitions equal, or just barely exceed, the quota q.
8 Haris Aziz, Barton Lee
Example 2 Let N = {1, 2, 3, 4}, C = {a, b, . . . , j} and k = 2,
%1: c ?1 c
? ?c, c? ? C
%2: a ?2 b ?2 . . . ?2 j
%3: ?3 define in anyway,
%4: ?4 define in anyway.
We consider PSC with respect to the Hare quota; that is, q = n/k = 2. There is a
(generalised) solid coalition N? = {1, 2} with |N?| ? q supporting candidate subset
C? = {a}. The generalised PSC axiom requires the election of ? = 1 candidates into
W who are at least as preferred as either voter {1, 2}’s most preferred candidate. Since
voter 1 is indifferent between all candidates, electing any candidate such as j ? C, will
satisfy the axiom - this is despite candidate j being voter 2’s strictly least preferred
candidate.
Definition 7 ((Generalised) weak q-PSC) Let W be an election outcome, weak
(generalised) q-PSC is satisfied if for all (generalised) solid coalitions N? of size
|N?| ? ?q supporting a candidate subset C? : |C?| ? ? then there exists a set C?? ? W
with size at least min{?, |C?|} such that for all c?? ? C??
?i ? N? : c?? %i c
(i,|C? |),
where c(i,|C
? |) denotes voter i’s |C?|-th most preferred candidate.
Generalising PSC to the case of weak preferences is important because
it provides a useful link with PR properties defined on dichotomous prefer-
ences. PJR (Proportional Justified Representation) (Sa?nchez-Ferna?ndez et al., 2017b;
Aziz and Huang, 2016) is a proportional representation property for dichotomous
preferences (Aziz et al., 2017).
Recall the following definition of PJR:
Definition 8 (PJR) A committee W with |W | = k satisfies PJR for a ballot profile
A = (A1, . . . , An) over a candidate set C if for every positive integer ? ? k there does
not exists a set of voters N? ? N with |N?| ? ? n
k
such that
?
?
?
?
i?N?
Ai
?
?
? ? ? but
?
?
?
(
?
i?N?
Ai
)
?W
?
?
? < ?.
Proposition 2 Under dichotomous preferences, generalised weak Hare-PSC implies
PJR.
Proof. Under dichotomous preferences every voter, say i, has precisely two equiv-
alence classes which partition the candidate set C. Thus, we can naturally represent
every voters preference by an (possibly empty) approval ballot Ai representing the
subset of strictly preferred candidates.
For the purpose of a contradiction, let W be a committee of size k and suppose
that Hare-PSC holds but PJR does not. If PJR does not hold, then there must exist a
set N? of voters and a positive integer ? such that |N?| ? ? n
k
and both
?
?
?
?
i?N?
Ai
?
?
? ? ? and
?
?
?
(
?
i?N?
Ai
)
?W
?
?
? < ?. (1)
Achieving Proportional Representation via Voting 9
But note that N? is a (generalised) solid coalition for each candidate subset C? ?
?
i?N? Ai since every candidate in C
? is weakly preferred to every candidate in C for
i ? N?. Since
?
?
?
?
i?N? Ai
?
?
? ? ?, we can select a C? with exactly ? candidates so that
|C?| = ?.
Thus, if generalised weak Hare-PSC holds then there exists a set C?? ? W with
size ? min{?, |C?|} = ? such that for all c?? ? C?? there exists i ? N? : c?? % c(i,?).
But note that for any i ? N? we have c(i,?) ? Ai and hence c
?? ? Ai. It follows that
c?? ? W ? Ai and C
?? ? (
?
i?N? Ai) ?W and so
?
?
?
(
?
i?N?
Ai
)
?W
?
?
? ?
?
?
?C?? ?W
?
?
? ? ?,
which contradicts (1). ??
Proposition 3 Under dichotomous preferences, PJR implies generalised Hare-PSC.
Proof. For the purpose of a contradiction, suppose that W is a committee of size k
which satisfies PJR but not generalised Hare-PSC. If generalised Hare-PSC does not
hold, then for some positive integer ? there exists a solid coalition N? with |N?| ? ? n
k
supporting a candidate subset C? such that for every subset C?? ? W with size at least
min{?, |C?|} we have for all i ? N? and for all c?? ? C??
c(i,|C
? |) ?i c
??
. (2)
Now since N? is a solid coalition for C? of size at least
?
n
k
? min{?, |C?|}
n
k
,
and so it must be that
C? ?
?
i?N?
Ai =?
?
?
?
?
i?N?
Ai
?
?
? ? |C?|.
By the PJR condition we then have
?
?
?(
?
i?N?
Ai) ?W
?
?
? ? min{?, |C?|}.
But then defining
C?? = (
?
i?N?
Ai) ?W,
provides a contradiction to (2), as required. ??
Corollary 1 Under dichotomous preferences, PJR, weak generalised Hare-PSC, and
generalised Hare-PSC are equivalent.
Since it is known that testing PJR is coNP-complete (Aziz and Huang, 2017), it
follows that testing generalised PSC and generalised weak PSC is coNP-complete.
Corollary 2 Testing generalised PSC and generalised weak PSC is coNP-complete
even under dichotomous preferences.
On the other hand, PSC and weak PSC can be tested efficiently (please see the
appendix).
Figure 1 depicts the relations between the different PR axioms.
10 Haris Aziz, Barton Lee
Weak
Preferences
Strict
Preferences
Dichotomous
Preferences
Gen PSC
Gen weak PSC
PSC
PJR weak PSC
Fig. 1 Relations between properties. An arrow from (A) to (B) denotes that (A) implies (B). For any
concept A, A with respect to Droop quota is stronger than A with respect to Hare quota.
4 The Case of STV
In this section, we define the family of STV rules for instances where voters sub-
mit strict preferences. The family is formalised as Algorithm 1. STV is a multi-
round rule in which in each round either a candidate is selected as a winner or one
candidate is eliminated from the set of potential winners. Depending on the quota
q and the reweighting rule applied, one can obtain particular STV rules (see e.g.,
Aleskerov and Karpov, 2013). One of the most common rules is attained when the
quota is set to the Hare quota and the discrete reweighting is used, this implies that
a subset of voters of size n/k is removed from the profile once their most preferred
candidate in the current profile has been selected. STV modifies the preference pro-
file ? by deleting candidates. We will denote by C(?) the current set of candidates in
the profile ?. When k = 1, STV is referred to as Instant-Runoff voting (IRV) or as the
Alternative Vote (AV).
Example 3 (Illustration of STV) Consider the following profile with 9 voters, k = 3
and suppose we use Hare-STV with fractional reweighting.
1 : c1, c2, c3, e1, e2, e3, e4, d1
2 : c2, c3, c1, e1, e2, e3, e4, d1
3 : c3, c1, d1, c2, e1, e2, e3, e4
4 : e1, e2, e3, e4, c1, c2, c3, d1
5 : e1, e2, e3, e4, c1, c2, c3, d1
6 : e1, e2, e3, e4, c1, c2, c3, d1
7 : e1, e2, e3, e4, c1, c2, c3, d1
8 : e1, e2, e3, e4, c1, c2, c3, d1
9 : e1, e2, e3, e4, c1, c2, c3, d1
In the first round e1 is selected and the total weight of the voters in set
{4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9} goes down by slightly above 3. Candidate e1 is then removed from
Achieving Proportional Representation via Voting 11
Algorithm 1 STV family of Rules
Input: (N,C,?, k) parametrised by quota q ? ( n
k+1
, n
k
]. {? is profile of strict prefer-
ences}
Output: W ? C such that |W | = k
1: W ?? ?;
2: wi ?? 1 for each i ? N
3: j?? 1
4: while |W | < k do
5: if |W | + |C(?)| = k then
6: return W ? C(?)
7: end if
8: if there is a candidate c with plurality support (weight of voters who have c as
the first ranked candidate) at least q then
9: Letting the set of voters supporting c be denoted by N?. Modify the weights
of voters in N? so the total weight of voters in N? decreases by at least q.
10: Remove c from the profile ?.
11: W ?? W ? {c}
12: else
13: Remove a candidate with the lowest plurality support from the current pref-
erence profile ?
14: end if
15: end while
16: return W
the preference profile. In the second round, e2 is selected and the total weight of
the voters in set {4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9} is now zero. Candidate e2 is then removed from the
preference profile. After that since no candidate has support, with respect to current
weights, of at least q = 3 one candidate is deleted. Candidates e3 and e4 are removed
in succession as they have plurality score zero with respect to the current voting
weights. Then candidates c1, c2, c3 all have equal and lowest plurality scores of one,
due to lexicographic tie-breaking candidates c3 and c2 are removed in succession. At
that point, c1 has plurality score q = 3 so it is the last candidate selected.
STV has been claimed to satisfy Proportionality for Solid Coalitions/Droop Pro-
portionality Criterion (Dummett, 1984; Woodall, 1994). On the other hand, STV vi-
olates just about every natural monotonicity axiom that has been proposed in the
literature.
STV can use fractional reweighting or discrete reweighting. We will show that
fractional reweighting is crucial for some semblance of PR. Incidentally, fractional
reweighting is not necessarily introduced to achieve better PR but primarily to min-
imize the “stochastic aspect” of tie-breaking in STV (pp 32, Tideman, 1995). The
following result shows that if STV resorts to discrete reweighting then it does not even
satisfy weak PSC. Discrete reweighting refers to the modification of voter weights in
Line 9 of Algorithm 1 such that the total weight of voters in N? decreases by some
integer greater or equal to q.
12 Haris Aziz, Barton Lee
Proposition 4 Under strict preferences, STV with discrete reweighting does not sat-
isfy Weak q-PSC irrespective to whether we use the Hare quota or Droop quota, for
any q ? ( n
k+1
, n
k
].
Proof. Let N = {1, 2, . . . , 10}, C = {c1, . . . , c8}, k = 7 and consider the following
profile:
1 : c1, c5, c6, c7, c8, c2, c3, c4
2 : c2, c5, c6, c7, c8, c1, c3, c4
3 : c3, c5, c6, c7, c8, c1, c2, c4
4 : c4, c5, c6, c7, c8, c1, c2, c3
5 : c5, c6, c7, c8, c1, c2, c3, c4
6 : c5, c6, c7, c8, c1, c2, c3, c4
7 : c5, c6, c7, c8, c1, c2, c3, c4
8 : c5, c6, c7, c8, c1, c2, c3, c4
9 : c5, c6, c7, c8, c1, c2, c3, c4
10 : c5, c6, c7, c8, c1, c2, c3, c4
We use STV with discrete reweighting to select the candidates. Under discrete
reweighting, the total weights of voters are modified by some integer p ? 2 (refer to
Line 9 of Algorithm 1). In this proof we focus on the case where p = 2, a similar
argument can be applied to prove the proposition for larger integer values.
Applying the STV process, first c5, c6 and c7 are selected. Each time we select
these candidates, the voting weight of voters in the set {5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10} goes down
by 2. Thus the remaining four candidates are to be selected from c1, c2, c3, c4 and c8.
At this stage candidate c8 has the lowest support of zero and is removed from all
preference profiles and the list of potentially elected candidates, and hence c8 < W.
Weak q-PSC requires that at least four candidates from {c5, c6, c7, c8} be selected,
since 6 ? 4 × q for all q ? (10/8, 10/7], but using discrete reweighting only three
candidates are selected by STV. ??
The proof above has a similar argument as Example 1 in
(Sa?nchez-Ferna?ndez et al., 2017a) that concerns an approval voting setting.
Next we show that STV satisfies weak PSC with fractional reweighting. We pro-
vide a formal proof of this statement, under the assumption that the reweighting in
Line 9 of Algorithm 1 decreases the total voter weight by precisely q.
Proposition 5 For any q ? ( n
k+1
, n
k
], under strict preferences STV satisfies weak q-
PSC
Proof. Let N? ? N be a solid coalition supporting a set of candidates |C?| ? ? such
that |N?| ? ?q.
Now consider the first approval election. Let C(1) be the set of candidates involved
in this election (i.e. the union of all voters’ first preference). The total weight of all
voters in N? is T ? ? ?q and the size of C? ? C(1) is ? ?, hence there must exists at
Achieving Proportional Representation via Voting 13
least one candidate in C? ? C(1) with support at least q (?). Thus, the deletion aspect
of STV (Line 13, Algorithm 1) is not applied .
Note that for all q ? ( n
k+1
, n
k
], if there exist a candidate with support at least q,
at some stage, then it must be that strictly less than k candidates have been elected
into W at this stage. To see this, simply observe that every candidate elected reduces
the total weight of voters n by precisely q. Thus if at least k candidates were elected
and there exists a candidate with support at least q this would imply a total initial
weight of all voters at least kq + q = (k + 1)q which is strictly greater than n. This is
a contradiction since the total initial weight of all voters is n.
Returning to (?) it must be that some c ? C? ? C(1) is elected into W at the first
stage and the total weight of voters in N? is reduced to T ??q ? (??1)q. Consider the
new set of plurality votes of voters in N?, say C?? ? C? ?C(1). The size of this set C??
is bounded above by (? ? 1) and the total weight of voters in N? is at least (? ? 1)q,
hence once again, there must exist at least one candidate in the election with support
at least q. Noting the previous argument, it must be that |W | < k at this stage and so
another candidate from C? ? {c} is elected.
The above process can be iteratively applied ? times - since the first ? preferences
of every voter in N? is contained in C?. This ensures that ? candidates from C? are
elected into W. Thus, weak q-PSC is satisfied. ??
Remark 2 Within the proof above, it can be observed that the deletion aspect of STV
(Line 13, Algorithm 1) is never applied in the first ? rounds.
The argument for weak q-PSC is extended to that for q-PSC as follows. Again
we assume that the reweighting in Line 9 of Algorithm 1 decreases the total voter
weights by precisely q.
Proposition 6 For any q ? ( n
k+1
, n
k
], under strict preferences STV satisfies q-PSC.
Sketch. Let N? ? N be a solid coalition supporting a set of candidates |C?| such that
|N?| ? ?q. Note that at most k ? ? candidates can be selected that have no plurality
contribution by voters in N?. The remaining ? candidates must be selected with some
contribution by voters in N?. Also note that voters in N? must contribute their weight
to candidates in C? before they contribute to candidates that come later. They can only
contribute to candidates after C? once all the candidates in C? have been removed.
However we argue that at most |C?| ? ? candidates can be deleted from C?. At any
point when the candidates in N? have voting weight at least ??q and the voters in N?
form a solid coalition for ?? candidates, then by a similar argument as in proof of the
previous proposition, all the ?? candidates have to be selected. This implies that at
most |C?|?? candidates can be deleted from C? and that ? candidates must be selected
from C?. ??
5 EAR (Expanding Approvals Rule)
We now present EAR (Expanding Approvals Rule). The rule utilises the idea of j-
approval voting whereby every voter is asked to approve their j most preferred can-
didates, for some positive integer j. At a high level, EAR works as follows.
14 Haris Aziz, Barton Lee
An index j is initialised to 1. The voting weight of each voter is initially 1.
We use a quota q that is between n/(k + 1) and n/k. While k candidates have
not been selected, we do the following. We perform j-approval voting with
respect to the voters’ current voting weights. If there exists a candidate c with
approval support at least a quota q, we select such a candidate with the highest
support and reduce the weight of all voters who approved of c by a total of q. If
there are multiple such candidates, we use rank-maximality (defined below)
to break ties. If there exists no such candidate, we increment j by one and
repeat until k candidates have been selected.
The rule is formally specified as Algorithm 2. It is well-defined for weak prefer-
ences. EAR is a novel rule that has not been formalised or analyzed before. However
it is based on a combination of several natural ideas that have been used in the design
of voting rules.
(i) Candidates are selected in a sequential manner.
(ii) A candidate needs to have at least n/(k+ 1) (roughly Droop quota) ‘support’ to
be selected.
(iii) The voting weight of a voter is reduced if some of her voting weight has al-
ready been used to select some candidate. The way voting weight is reduced is
fractional.8
(iv) We use j-approval voting for varying j. When considering weak orders, we
adapt j-approval voting so that in j-approval voting, a voter not only approves
her j most preferred candidates but also any candidate that is at least as pre-
ferred as the j-th most preferred candidate.
(v) Among candidates with support at least q, rank maximality is used for the order
of selection (defined below).
For any candidate a, its corresponding rank vector is r(a) = (r1(a), . . . , rm(a))
where r j(a) is the number of voters who have a in his j-th most preferred equivalence
class. We compare rank vectors lexicographically. One rank vector r = (r1, . . . , rm) is
better than r? = (r?
1
, . . . , r?m) if for the smallest i such that ri , r
?
i
, it must hold that
ri > r
?
i
.
In EAR, we have specified how to perform the priority tie-breaking (Step 1) and
how exactly to do the fractional reweighting (Step 11). However these specifications
are not critical for satisfying the PR properties of EAR. On the other hand, the default
of quota of q = n
k+1
+ 1
m+1
(
? n
k+1
? + 1 ? n
k+1
)
is useful to satisfy (Generalised) Droop-
PSC. The reason for choosing this quota is that q can be viewed as q = n
k+1
+ ? where
? is small enough so that that for any ? ? k, ? · q < ? n
k+1
+ 1. The specific way we
perform the priority tie-breaking (Step 1) is useful for ensuring that EAR satisfies
RRCM.
In the following example, we demonstrate how EAR works.
8 Fractional reweighting in STV has been referred to as Gregory or ‘senatorial’ (see e.g., Janson, 2016;
Tideman, 1995)
Achieving Proportional Representation via Voting 15
Algorithm 2 EAR
Input: (N,C,%, k) parametrised by quota q ? ( n
k+1
, n
k
]. {% can contain weak orders;
if a voter i expresses her preferences over a subset C? ? C, then C\C? is considered
the last equivalence class of the voter.}
Output: W ? C such that |W | = k
1: Construct a priority ordering L over C that is with respect to rank maximality
under %. In case of ties, use lexicographic tie-breaking.
2: Default quota q is set as follows.
q =
n
k + 1
+
1
m + 1
(
?
n
k + 1
? + 1 ?
n
k + 1
)
.
3: C? ?? C; W ?? ?
4: wi ?? 1 for each i ? N
5: j?? 1
6: while |W | < k do
7: while there does not exist a candidate in C \ W with support at least q in a
j-approval vote do
8: j?? j + 1
9: end while
10: Among the candidates with weight support at least q in a j-approval election,
select the candidate c from C? that has highest ranking wrt L. {Voters are asked
to approve their j most preferred candidates and any candidates that are at least
as preferred as the j–th most preferred candidate.}
11: Modify the weights of voters who supported c in the j-approval election. If the
total support for c is T , then for each i ? N who supported c:
wi ?? wi ×
T ? q
T
.
12: W ?? W ? {c}
13: C? ?? C? \ {c}
14: end while
15: return W
Example 4 (Illustration of EAR) Consider the profile with 9 voters and where k = 3.
Note that the Droop quota is 9/4 = 2.25.
1 : c1, c2, c3, e1, e2, e3, e4, d1
2 : c2, c3, c1, e1, e2, e3, e4, d1
3 : c3, c1, d1, c2, e1, e2, e3, e4
4 : e1, e2, e3, e4, c1, c2, c3, d1
5 : e1, e2, e3, e4, c1, c2, c3, d1
6 : e1, e2, e3, e4, c1, c2, c3, d1
7 : e1, e2, e3, e4, c1, c2, c3, d1
8 : e1, e2, e3, e4, c1, c2, c3, d1
9 : e1, e2, e3, e4, c1, c2, c3, d1
16 Haris Aziz, Barton Lee
In the first round e1 is selected and the total weight of the voters in set
{4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9} goes down by slightly above 9/4 = 2.25.
In the second round, since no other candidate has sufficient weight when we run
1-approval, we consider 2-approval voting. Under 2-approval, candidate e2 receives
more than 2.25 support. When e2 is selected, the total weight of the voters in set
{4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9} goes down by again slightly above 9/4 = 2.25. At this point the total
weight of voters in set {4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9} is at most 1 and no unselected candidate has
approval support more than 2.25, under 2-approval. So EAR considers 3-approval
whereby, candidates c1 and c3 both get support 3. Hence EAR selects c1, due to the
priority ordering L, and the winning committee is {e1, e2, c1}.
We point out the rule’s outcome can be computed efficiently.
Proposition 7 EAR runs in polynomial time O(n + m)2.
Proof. In each round, the smallest j is found for which there are some candidates in
C \W that have an approval score of at least q. The candidate c with the highest score
is identified. All voters who approved of c have their weight modified accordingly
which takes linear time. Hence the whole algorithm takes polynomial time. ??
A possible criticism of EAR is that the choice of quota as well as reweighting
makes it complicated enough to not be usable by hand or to be easily understood
by the general public. However we have shown that without resorting to fractional
reweighting, STV already fails weak PSC. Secondly, even simpler versions of STV
elections are best used by the help of computers.
Since EAR is designed for proportional representation which is only meaningful
for large enough k, EAR may not be the ideal rule for k = 1. Having said that, we
mention the following connection with a single-winner rule from the literature.
Remark 3 For k = 1 and under linear orders with every candidate in the list, EAR is
equivalent to the fall-back voting rule of Brams and Sanver (2009).
Under dichotomous preferences and using Hare quota, EAR bears similarity to
Phragme?n’s first method (also called Enstro?m’s method) described by Janson (2016)
(page 59). However the latter method when extended to strict preferences does not
satisfy Hare-PSC. Although EAR has connections with previous rules, extending
them to the case of multiple-winners and to handle dichotomous, strict and weak pref-
erences simultaneously and satisfy desirable PR properties requires careful thought.
We observe some simple properties of the rule. It is anonymous (the names of the
voters do not matter). It is also neutral as long as lexicographic tie-breaking is not
required to be used. Under linear orders and when using EAR with the default quota,
if more than half the voters most prefer a candidate, then that candidate is selected.
We defer the proof the next section because the statement is implied by a stronger
statement. We note that using the default quota of EAR is crucial for the majority
property.
Achieving Proportional Representation via Voting 17
6 Proportional Representation and Candidate Monotonicity under EAR
6.1 Proportional Representation under EAR
We argue that EAR satisfies the central PR axioms. In order to build intuition, we
first give an argument that EAR satisfies Droop-PSC under linear orders. We will
then extend the argument for weak orders.
Proposition 8 Under linear orders, EAR satisfies Droop-PSC.
Proof. For the purpose of a contradiction suppose that Droop-PSC is not satis-
fied for some EAR outcome W. That is, there exists a solid coalition N? such that
|N?| > ?n/(k + 1) for some candidate subset C? and |W ? C?| < min{?, |C?|}. Let ? be
the smallest positive integer such that the previous statement holds and let C? be a
minimally sized candidate subset which N? supports as a solid coalition (?).
First we claim that the |C?|-approval election must be reached. Suppose not, then
it must be that |W | = k at some earlier j-approval election where j < |C?|. But if
|W | = k this implies that after reweighting
?
i?N
wi = n ? kq <
n
k + 1
since q >
n
k + 1
, (3)
and since C? is minimal (recall (?)) it follows that
?
i?N?
wi > ?
n
k + 1
? (? ? 1)
n
k + 1
=
n
k + 1
. (4)
This contradicts (3).
Now, at the |C?|-approval election every voter in N? only supports candidates in C?.
Under the original weightings
?
i?N? wi > ?n/(k + 1), since the EAR elects candidate
with support at least q and scales down weightings after each elected candidate it is
clear that at least min{?, |C?|}-candidates from C? must be elected into W, providing
the contradiction required. ??
Corollary 3 EAR satisfies Hare-PSC.
Corollary 4 Under linear orders, EAR with the default quota satisfies the majority
principle.
Proof. Under linear orders, Droop-PSC implies the majority principle. ??
Proposition 9 Under weak orders, EAR satisfies generalised Droop-PSC.
Proof. Let W be an outcome of the EAR and suppose for the purpose of a contradic-
tion that generalised Droop-PSC is not satisfied. That is, there exists a positive integer
? and a solid coalition N? such that |N?| > ?n/(k+ 1) supporting a candidate subset C?
and for every set C?? ? W with |C??| ? min{?, |C?|} there exists c?? ? C?? such that
?i ? N? c(i,|C
? |) ?i c
??. (5)
18 Haris Aziz, Barton Lee
Let ? be the smallest positive integer such that the above statement holds and let C?
be a minimally sized candidate subset which N? supports (?).
Let j? be the smallest approval election which include C? in the approvals of all
voters in N?. We claim that the j?-approval election must be reached. Suppose not,
then it must be that |W | = k at some earlier j-approval election where j < j?. But if
|W | = k this implies that after reweighting
?
i?N
wi = n ? kq <
n
k + 1
since q >
n
k + 1
, (6)
and since C? is minimal (recall (?)) it follows that
?
i?N?
wi > ?
n
k + 1
? (? ? 1)
n
k + 1
=
n
k + 1
. (7)
This contradicts (6).
Now, at the j?-approval election every voter in N? supports candidates in C? and
possibly some other candidates whom are at least as preferred as their |C?|-th most
preferred candidate. Let C?? be the super-set of C? which is equal to the set of candi-
dates supported by voters in N?. Note that C?? need not equal C?.
Under the original weightings
?
i?N? wi > ?n/(k + 1), since the EAR elects candi-
dates with support at least q and scales down weightings after each elected candidate
it is clear that at least min{?, |C?|} candidates from C?? must be elected into W. But for
every candidate c?? ? C?? at least one voter weakly prefers c?? to c(i,|C
? | (by construction
of C??) which contradicts (5). ??
Remark 4 Note that EAR satisfying PSC or generalised PSC does not depend on
what priority tie-breaking is used (Step 1) or how the fractional reweighting is applied
(Step 11).
Corollary 5 Under weak orders, EAR satisfies generalised Hare-PSC.
We get the following corollary of the above corollary.
Corollary 6 EAR satisfies proportional justified representation.
Proof. We had observed that under dichotomous preferences, generalised Hare-PSC
implies PJR. ??
Since EAR satisfies generalised PSC, it implies that there exists a polynomial-
time algorithm to compute a committee satisfying generalised PSC. Interestingly, we
already observed that checking whether a given committee satisfies generalised PSC
is coNP-complete.
Achieving Proportional Representation via Voting 19
6.2 Candidate Monotonicity under EAR
We show that EAR satisfies rank respecting candidate monotonicity (RRCM). In what
follows we shall refer to the profile of all voter preferences (weak or strict) as simply
the profile - often denoted by P.
Proposition 10 EAR satisfies rank respecting candidate monotonicity (RRCM).
Proof. Consider a profile P with election outcome W and let ci ? W. Now consider
another modified profile P? in which ci’s rank is improved while not harming the rank
of other winning candidates, relative to P, and denote the election outcome under
P? by W?. Let the order of candidates selected under P be c1, . . . , ci, . . . , c|W |. In the
modified profile P?, let us trace the order of candidates selected. For the first candidate
c1, either it is selected first for exactly the same reason as it is selected first under P or,
alternatively, now c is selected. If c is selected, our claim has been proved. Otherwise,
the same argument is used for candidates after c1 until ci is selected. ??
This leads immediately to the following corollaries of the above proposition.
Corollary 7 EAR satisfies non-crossing candidate monotonicity (NCCM).
Corollary 8 For k = 1, EAR satisfies candidate monotonicity (CM).
Corollary 9 For dichotomous preferences, EAR satisfies candidate monotonicity.
Proof. Consider dichotomous profile P and another profile dichotomous P? in which
winning candidate ci’s rank is improved while not harming the rank of other winning
candidates. This implies that the rank of ci is improved while not affecting the ranks
of any other alternatives including the winning candidates. Since EAR satisfies rank
respecting candidate monotonicity (RRCM), it follows that for dichotomous prefer-
ences, EAR satisfies candidate monotonicity. ??
On the other hand, EAR does not satisfy CM or WCM for k > 1.
Proposition 11 EAR does not satisfy WCM.
Proof. Let N = {1, 2, 3, 4}, C = {a, b, . . . , f } and let strict preferences be given by the
following preference profile P:
1 : a, c, f , d, ...
2 : d, b, f , c, ...
3 : a, d, c, f , ...
4 : c, e, f , d, ...
With this preference profile EAR will output the winning committee W = {a, f }.
Noting that q ? ( 4
3
, 2], first a is selected into W and each weight of voters in {1, 2}
is reduced to
2?q
2
? [0, 1
3
). Moving to the 2-approval election no candidate receives
support of at least q, finally in the 3-approval election the only candidate with support
at least q is candidate f and hence f is also selected into W.
20 Haris Aziz, Barton Lee
Now consider a reinforcement of f by voter 1 (shift f from third to first place),
this is described by the following preference profile P?:
1 : f , a, c, d, ...
2 : d, b, f , c, ...
3 : a, d, c, f , ...
4 : c, e, f , d, ...
With these preferences the winning committee is W? = {d, c}. In the 2-approval elec-
tion both candidates a and d attain support of at least q, however due to the priority
ordering L (rank maximality) candidate d is selected into W and each voter in {2, 3}
has their weight reduced to
2?q
2
? [0, 1
3
). In the 3-approval election both candidates
c and f attain support of at least 2 ? q. Furthermore, c and f are equally ranked
with respect to the priority ordering L - applying lexicographic tie-breaking leads to
c being elected into W?. ??
Remark 5 The above proposition is for any q ? ( n
k+1
, n
k
], which includes the default
quota of EAR.
7 Other Rules
In the literature, several rules have been defined for PR purposes. We explain how
EAR is better in its role at achieving a strong degree of PR or has other relative
merits.
7.1 QBS (Quota Borda System)
Dummett (1984) proposed a counterpart to STV called QPS (Quota Preference Score)
or a more specific version QBS (Quota Borda System). The rule works for complete
linear orders and is designed to obtain a committee that satisfies Droop-PSC. It does
so by examining the prefixes (of increasing sizes) of the preference lists of voters and
checking whether there exists a corresponding solid coalition for a set of voters. If
there is such a solid set of voters, then the appropriate number of candidates with the
highest Borda count are selected. 9
Although Dummett did not show that the rule satisfies some axiom which STV
does not, he argued that QPS satisfies the Droop proportionality criterion and is some-
what less “chaotic” than STV. Schulze (2002) argues that QBS is chaotic as well and
his Example 3 implicitly shows that QBS in fact violates WCM.10 Tideman also feels
that QBS is overly designed to satisfy Droop-PSC but is not robust enough to go
beyond this criterion especially if voters in a solid coalition perturb their preferences.
EAR has some important advantages over QBS: (1) it can easily handle indif-
ferences whereas QBS is not well-defined for indifferences. In particular, in order for
9 The description of the rule is somewhat informal and long in the original books of Dummett which
may have lead to The Telegraph terming the rule as a “a highly complex arrangement” (Telegraph, 2011).
10 Geller (2002) wrongly claims that QBS satisfies CM.
Achieving Proportional Representation via Voting 21
QBS to be suitably generalised for indifferences and to still satisfy generalised PSC, it
may become an exponential-time rule11, (2) EAR can easily handle voters expressing
partial lists by implicitly having a last indifference class whereas QBS cannot achieve
this, (3) EAR rule satisfies an established PR property called PJR for the case for di-
chotomous preferences. As said earlier, QBS is not well-defined for indifferences and
even for dichotomous preferences, (4) EAR addresses a criticism of Tideman (2006):
“Suppose there are voters who would be members of a solid coalition except that
they included an “extraneous” candidate, which is quickly eliminated among their
top choices. These voters’ nearly solid support for the coalition counts for nothing
which seems to me inappropriate.” We demonstrate the last flaw of QBS pointed out
by Tideman in the explicit example below. EAR does not have this flaw.
Example 5 Consider the profile with 9 voters and where k = 3.
1 : c1, c2, c3, e1, e2, e3, e4, d1
2 : c2, c3, c1, e1, e2, e3, e4, d1
3 : c3, c1, d1, c2, e1, e2, e3, e4
4 : e1, e2, e3, e4, c1, c2, c3, d1
5 : e1, e2, e3, e4, c1, c2, c3, d1
6 : e1, e2, e3, e4, c1, c2, c3, d1
7 : e1, e2, e3, e4, c1, c2, c3, d1
8 : e1, e2, e3, e4, c1, c2, c3, d1
9 : e1, e2, e3, e4, c1, c2, c3, d1
In the example, {e1, e2, e3} is the outcome of QBS. Although PSC is not violated for
voters in {1, 2, 3} but the outcome appears to be unfair to them because they almost
have a solid coalition. Since they form one-third of the electorate they may feel that
they deserve that at least one candidate such as c1, c2 or c3 should be selected.
7.2 Chamberlain-Courant and Monroe
There are other rules that have been proposed within the class of “fully proportional
representation” rules such as Monroe (Monroe, 1995) and Chamberlain-Courant
(CC) (Chamberlin and Courant, 1983). Recently, variants of the rules called Greedy
Monroe, and Greedy CC (Elkind et al., 2014, 2017) have been discussed. However
none of the rules satisfy even weak PSC (Elkind et al., 2014, 2017). Even though
Monroe and CC have been extensively studied with respect to PR, they do not seem
to satisfy any compelling PR axiom. A reason for this is that voters are assumed to
not care about how many of their highly preferred candidates are in the committee
11 QBS checks for PSC requirements and adds suitable number of candidates to represent the corre-
sponding solid coalition of voters. In order to work for generalised PSC, QBS will have to identify whether
solid coalitions of voters and meet their requirement which means that it will need to solve the problem of
testing generalised-PSC which is coNP-complete.
22 Haris Aziz, Barton Lee
as long the most preferred is present. Monroe and CC are also NP-hard to com-
pute (Procaccia et al., 2008).
7.3 Phragmen’s Methods
A compelling rule is Phragmen’s Ordered Method (also called SeqPhragmen) that
can even be generalised for weak orders. Under strict preferences, it satisfies weak
Droop-PSC (Theorem 16.1 (ii), Janson, 2016). On the other hand, even under strict
preferences, it does not satisfy Droop-PSC (page 51, Janson, 2016). If we are willing
to forego PSC, then SeqPhragmen seems to be an exceptionally useful rule for strict
preferences because unlike STV it satisfies both candidate monotonicity and com-
mittee monotonicity (Janson, 2016). Committee monotonicity requires that for any
outcome W of size k, there is a possible outcome W? of size k + 1 such that W? ? W.
7.4 Phragme?n’s First Method
Phragme?n’s first method was first considered by Phragme?n but not published or pur-
sued by him (Janson, 2016). In the method, voters approve of most preferred candi-
date that has not yet been selected. The candidate with highest weight of approval
is selected. The total weight of the voters whose approved candidate was selected is
reduced by the Hare quota if the total weight is more than the Hare quota. Otherwise
all such voters’ weights are set to zero. The method does not satisfy Hare-PSC even
under strict preferences. See the example below.
Example 6 Consider the profile with 9 voters and where k = 3.
1 : c1, c2, c3,
2 : c2, c3, c1,
3 : c3, c1, c3,
4 : e1, c1, c2, c3,
5 : e2, c1, c2, c3,
6 : e3, c1, c2, c3,
7 : e4, c1, c2, c3,
8 : e5, c1, c2, c3,
9 : e6, c1, c2, c3
In the example, {e1, e2, e3} is a possible outcome of rule. When e1 is selected,
voter 4’s weight goes to zero. Then when e2 is selected, voter 5’s weight goes to zero.
Finally e3 is selected. Hare-PSC requires that c1 or c2, or c3 is selected.
Achieving Proportional Representation via Voting 23
7.5 Thiele’s Methods
Thiele’s methods are based on identifying candidates that are most preferred by the
largest weight of voters. For any voter who has had j candidates selected has current
weight 1/( j+1). Janson (2016) presented Examples 13.14 and 13.15 that can be used
to show that Thiele’s methods do not satisfy weak Droop-PSC even under strict or
under dichotomous preferences.
7.6 CPO-STV rules
A class of STV related rules is CPO-STV that was proposed by Tideman (2006). The
rules try to achieve a PR-type objective while ensuring that for k = 1, a Condorcet
winner is returned if there exists a Condorcet winner. One particular rule within this
class is Schulz-STV (Schulze, 2011). All of these rules are only defined for linear or-
ders and hence do not satisfy generalised PSC. Furthermore, they all require enumera-
tion of all possible committees and then finding pairwise comparisons between them.
Hence they are exponential-time rules and impractical for large elections. Tideman
(1995) writes that CPO-STV is “computationally tedious, and for an election with
several winners and many candidates it may not be feasible.” Tideman (2006) also
considered whether CPO-STV rules satisfy Droop-PSC but was unable to prove that
they satisfy PSC (page 282). In any case, having an exponential-time rule satisfying
PSC may not be compelling because there exists a trivial exponential-time algorithm
that satisfies PSC: enumerate committees, check whether they satisfy PSC, and then
return one of them.
8 Conclusions
STV QBS EAR
Generalised D-PSC / H-PSC no no yes
Generalised weak D-PSC / H-PSC no no yes
PJR no no yes
D-PSC / H-PSC yes yes yes
Weak D-PSC / H-PSC yes yes yes
CM no no no
CM for dichotomous preferences no no yes
CM for k = 1 no yes yes
RRCM no no yes
NCCM no yes yes
polynomial-time yes yes yes
Table 1 Properties satisfied by STV, QBS, and EAR. QBS and STV are the only rules from the literature
that satisfy PSC and are polynomial-time. STV does not satisfy weak PSC if discrete reweighting is used.
24 Haris Aziz, Barton Lee
Complexity of Complexity of
Computing Testing
PSC in P in P
Weak PSC in P in P
Generalised PSC in P coNP-complete
Generalised weak PSC in P coNP-complete
Table 2 Computational complexity of computing a committee satisfying a PR property and testing
whether a given committee satisfies a property.
In this paper, we undertook a formal study of proportional representation under
weak preferences. The generalised PSC axiom we proposed generalises several well-
studied PR axioms in the literature. We then devised a rule that satisfies the axiom.
Since it has relative merits over STV and Dummet’s QBS (two known rules that sat-
isfy PSC), it appears to be a compelling solution for achieving PR via voting. At the
very least, it appears to be another useful option in the toolbox of representative vot-
ing rules and deserves further consideration and study. The relative merits of STV,
QBS, and EAR are summarised in Table 1. Our work also sheds light on the com-
plexity of computing committees that satisfy PR axioms as well the the complexity
of testing whether a given a committee satisfies a given PR axiom. We found that
whereas a polynomial-time algorithm such as EAR finds a committee that satisfies
generalised PSC, testing whether a given committee satisfies properties such as gen-
eralised PSC or generalised weak PSC is computationally hard. These findings are
summarised in Table 2.
Acknowledgments
Haris Aziz is supported by a Julius Career Award. Barton Lee is supported by a
Scientia PhD fellowship. The authors thank Bill Zwicker for valuable comments.
References
K. V. K. Aiyar. Proportional Representation by The Single Transferable Vote: The
System and its Methods. The Madras Law Journal Press, 1930.
F. Aleskerov and A. Karpov. A new single transferable vote method and its axiomatic
justification. Social Choice and Welfare, 40(13):771–786, 2013.
H. Aziz and S. Huang. Computational complexity of testing proportional justified
representation. Technical Report arXiv:1612.06476, arXiv.org, 2016.
H. Aziz and S. Huang. A polynomial-time algorithm to achieve extended justified
representation. Technical Report arXiv:1703.10415, arXiv.org, 2017.
H. Aziz, M. Brill, V. Conitzer, E. Elkind, R. Freeman, and T. Walsh. Justified repre-
sentation in approval-based committee voting. Social Choice and Welfare, 2017.
D. Black. The Theory of Committees and Elections. Cambridge University Press,
1958.
Achieving Proportional Representation via Voting 25
S. Bowler and B. Grofman. Introduction: STV as an Embedded Institution. In Elec-
tions in Australia, Ireland, and Malta under the Single Transferable Vote: Reflec-
tions on an Embedded Institution, pages 1–14, 2000.
S. Brams and R. Sanver. Voting systems that combine approval and preference. In The
Mathematics of Preference, Choice and Order, pages 215–237. Springer, 2009.
J. R. Chamberlin and P. N. Courant. Representative deliberations and representative
decisions: Proportional representation and the Borda rule. The American Political
Science Review, 77(3):718–733, 1983.
M. Dummett. Voting Procedures. Oxford University Press, 1984.
M. Dummett. Principles of Electoral Reform. Oxford University Press, 1997.
E. Elkind, P., Faliszewski, P. Skowron, and A. Slinko. Properties of multiwinner
voting rules. In Proceedings of the 13th International Joint Conference on Au-
tonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (AAMAS), pages 53–60, 2014.
E. Elkind, P. Faliszewski, P. Skowron, and A. Slinko. Properties of multiwinner
voting rules. Social Choice and Welfare, 2017.
P. Faliszewski, P. Skowron, A. Slinko, and N. Talmon. Multiwinner voting: A new
challenge for social choice theory. In U. Endriss, editor, Trends in Computational
Social Choice, chapter 2. 2017. Forthcoming.
W. V. Gehrlein. The Condorcet criterion and committee selection. Mathematical
Social Sciences, 10(3):199–209, 1985.
C. Geller. Single transferable vote with borda elimination: a new vote-counting sys-
tem. Technical Report 2201, Deakin University, Faculty of Business and Law,
2002.
I. D. Hill. Difficulties with equality of preference. Voting Matters, (13), 2001.
S. Janson. Phragme?n’s and Thiele’s election methods. Technical Report
arXiv:1611.08826 [math.HO], arXiv.org, 2016.
B. L. Meek. A new approach to the single transferable vote, paper ii. Voting Matters,
(1), 1994.
B. L. Monroe. Fully proportional representation. The American Political Science
Review, 89(4):925–940, 1995.
A. D. Procaccia, J. S. Rosenschein, and A. Zohar. On the complexity of achieving
proportional representation. Social Choice and Welfare, 30:353–362, 2008.
L. Sa?nchez-Ferna?ndez, E. Elkind, and M. Lackner. Committees providing ejr can be
computed efficiently. Technical Report arXiv:1704.00356, arXiv.org, 2017a.
L. Sa?nchez-Ferna?ndez, E. Elkind, M. Lackner, N. Ferna?ndez, J. A. Fisteus, P. Basanta
Val, and P. Skowron. Proportional justified representation. In Proceedings of the
31st AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI). AAAI Press, 2017b.
R. Sanver and W. S. Zwicker. Monotonicity properties and their adaptation to irreso-
lute social choice rules. Social Choice and Welfare, 39:371–398, 2012.
M. Schulze. On Dummett’s ’Quota Borda System’. Voting matters, 15(3), 2002.
M. Schulze. Free riding and vote management under proportional representation by
single transferable vote. 2011.
The Telegraph. Professor Sir Michael Dummett, December 2011.
N. Tideman. The single transferable vote. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 9(1):
27–38, 1995.
26 Haris Aziz, Barton Lee
N. Tideman and D. Richardson. Better voting methods through technology: The
refinement-manageability trade-off in the single transferable vote. Public Choice,
103(1-2):13–34, 2000.
T. N. Tideman. Collective Decisions And Voting: The Potential for Public Choice.
Ashgate, 2006.
D. Woodall. Properties of preferential election rules. Voting Matters, 3, 1994.
D. R. Woodall. Monotonicity of single-seat preferential election rules. Discrete
Applied Mathematics, 77(1):81–98, 1997.
W. S. Zwicker. Introduction to the theory of voting. In F. Brandt, V. Conitzer, U. En-
driss, J. Lang, and A. D. Procaccia, editors, Handbook of Computational Social
Choice, chapter 2. Cambridge University Press, 2016.
A Complexity of Testing PSC
Proposition 12 Under linear orders, it can be tested in polynomial time whether a committee satisfies
PSC.
Proof. For each i from 1 to m one can look at prefixes of preference lists of sizes i. For these prefixes, we
can see check whether there exists a corresponding solid coalition. For such solid coalitions we can check
whether the appropriate number of candidates are selected or not. ??
The same idea can be used for weak PSC.
Proposition 13 Under linear orders, it can be tested in polynomial time whether a committee satisfies
weak PSC.
Proposition 14 Under dichotomous preference, the problem of testing generalised PSC is coNP-complete.
Proof. Under dichotomous preferences, generalised PSC is equivalent to PJR. Since Aziz and Huang
(2017) showed that testing PJR is coNP-complete, it follows that that testing Generalised PSC is coNP-
complete as well. ??
