Multi-Agent Q-Learning for Minimizing
Demand-Supply Power Deficit in Microgrids
Raghuram Bharadwaj D.
IISc, Bangalore, India
raghu.bharadwaj@csa.iisc.ernet.in
D. Sai Koti Reddy
IISc, Bangalore, India
danda.reddy@csa.iisc.ernet.in
Shalabh Bhatnagar
IISc, Bangalore, India
shalabh@csa.iisc.ernet.in
Abstract—We consider the problem of minimizing the differ-
ence in the demand and the supply of power using microgrids.
We setup multiple microgrids, that provide electricity to a village.
They have access to the batteries that can store renewable power
and also the electrical lines from the main grid. During each time
period, these microgrids need to take decision on the amount of
renewable power to be used from the batteries as well as the
amount of power needed from the main grid. We formulate this
problem in the framework of Markov Decision Process (MDP),
similar to the one discussed in [1]. The power allotment to the
village from the main grid is fixed and bounded, whereas the
renewable energy generation is uncertain in nature. Therefore we
adapt a distributed version of the popular Reinforcement learning
technique, Multi-Agent Q-Learning to the problem. Finally, we
also consider a variant of this problem where the cost of power
production at the main site is taken into consideration. In this
scenario the microgrids need to minimize the demand-supply
deficit, while maintaining the desired average cost of the power
production.
I. INTRODUCTION
Electricity is one of the most important components of the
modern life. According to a recent survey, there are a total of
18,452 un-electrified villages in India [2]. Providing electricity
to these villages is difficult for a number of reasons. The
village may be situated very far away from the main grid and
it would be difficult to establish a direct electrical line between
the main grid and the village. Also, due to increasing global
warming, we want to make less use of fossil fuels for the
generation of power. Our objective in this work is to provide
a solution to electrifying these villages.
The concept of smart grid [3], is aimed at improving
traditional power grid operations. It is a distributed energy
network composed of intelligent nodes (or agents) that can
either operate autonomously or communicate and share energy.
The power grid is facing wide variety of challenges due
to incorporation of renewable and sustainable energy power
generation sources. The aim of smart grid is to effectively
deliver energy to consumers and maintain grid stability.
A microgrid is a distributed networked group consisting of
renewable energy generation sources with the aim of providing
energy to small areas. This scenario is being envisaged as
an important alternative to the conventional scheme with
large power stations transmitting energy over long distances.
The microgrid technology is useful particularly in the Indian
context where extending power supply from the main grids
to remote villages is a challenge. While the main power
stations are highly connected, microgrids with local power
generation, storage and conversion capabilities, act locally or
share power with a few neighboring microgrid nodes [4].
Integrating microgrids into smartgrid poses several technical
challenges. These challenges need to be addressed in order to
maintain the reliable and stable operation of electric grid.
Research on smartgrids can be classified into two areas
- Demand-side management and Supply-side management.
Demand side management (DSM) ([5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10])
deals with techniques developed to efficiently use the power
by bringing the customers into the play. The main idea is
to reduce the consumption of power during peak time and
shifting it during the other times. This is done by dynamically
changing the price of power and sharing this information with
the customers. Key techniques to address DSM problem in
smart grid are peak clipping, valley filling, load shifting [11].
In [12], Reinforcement Learning (RL) is used in smart grids
for pricing mechanism so as to improve the profits of broker
agents who procure energy from power generation sources and
sell it to consumers.
Supply-side management deals with developing techniques
to efficiently make use of renewable and non-renewable energy
at the supply side. In this paper, we consider one such problem
of minimizing Demand-Supply deficit in microgrids. In [1],
authors developed an MDP and applied Dynamic optimization
methods to this problem. But when the model information (the
renewable energy generation in this case) is not known, we
cannot apply these techniques.
In our current work, we setup microgrids closer to the
village. These microgrids has power connections from the
main grid and also with the batteries that can store renewable
energy. Owing to their cost, these batteries will have limited
storage capacities. Each microgrid needs to take decision on
amount of renewable energy that needs to be used at every time
slot and the amount of power that needs to be drawn from the
main grid. Consider a scenario where, microgrids will use the
renewable energy as it is generated. That is, they do not store
the energy. Then, during the peak demand, if the amount of
renewable energy generated is low and power obtained from
the main grid is also low, it leads to huge blackout. Thus, it is
important to intelligently store and use the renewable energy.
In this work, we apply Multi-agent Q-learning algorithm to
solve this problem.
ar
X
iv
:1
70
8.
07
73
2v
2 
 [
cs
.S
Y
] 
 2
8 
A
ug
 2
01
7
ORGANIZATION OF THE PAPER
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next
section describes the important problems associated with the
microgrids and solution techniques to solve them. Section III
presents the results of experiments of our algorithms. Section
IV provides the concluding remarks and Section V discusses
the future research directions.
II. OUR WORK
In this section, we discuss two important problems associ-
ated with the microgrids. We first formulate the problem in the
framework of Markov Decision Process (MDP), similar to the
one described in [1]. We then apply cooperative Multi-Agent
Q-Learning algorithm to solve the problems.
A. Problem 1 - Minimizing Demand-Supply Deficit
Consider a village that has not been electrified yet. We
setup microgrids close to the village, and provides electrical
connections to the village. It also has power connections from
the main grid. Decision on power supply is generally taken
in time slots, for example every two hours. Microgrids do
not have non-renewable power generation capabilities. They
have access to the renewable power and needs to obtain the
excess power from the main grid. For ease of explanation,
we consider two renewable sources - solar and wind. At
the beginning of each time slot, microgrids obtain the power
demand from customers with the help of the smart meters
[13]. These microgrids need to take decisions on amount of
renewable power to be used so that the expected long term
demand-supply deficit is minimized.
One natural solution without the use of storage batteries is to
fully use the solar and wind power generated in each time slot.
The excess demand will be then requested from the main grid.
If the requested power is less than or equal to the maximum
allotted power, the main grid transfers this to the microgrids.
Other wise, it transfers the maximum allotted power. This idea
is described in Algorithm 1.
Our objective in the current work is to do better than
the above described solution. Microgrids are equipped with
batteries that can store the renewable power. That is, we
deploy the microgrids at the sites where there is availability of
renewable resources. The goal is to intelligently use the stored
power in batteries and take the optimal action at every time
slot to minimize the demand-supply deficit.
We formulate the problem in the framework of Markov
Decision Process (MDP). MDP [14] is the most popular
mathematical framework for modeling optimal sequential de-
cision making problems under uncertainty. A Markov decision
process is defined via tuple < S;A;P ;R >, where S is the set
of states. A is the set of actions. P respectively the probability
transition matrix. Pa(s, s
?
) is the probability that by taking
action a in the state s, the system moves into the state s
?
. R is
the reward function where Ra(s, s
?
) is the reward obtained by
taking action a in the state s and the s
?
being the next state. In
infinite horizon discounted setting [15], the goal is to obtain
Algorithm 1
1: Demand ? Initial Demand
2: get Demand(Demand) : Function that gives next Demand
based on the current Demand.
3: solar() : Function that computes solar power generated in
a time slot
4: wind() : Function that computes wind power generated in
a time slot
5: max prod : Maximum power alloted by the main grid.
6: Deficit = 0 ; iterations = 0
7: procedure AT EVERY TIME SLOT
8: solar action = solar()
9: wind action = wind()
10: main action = max(0,min(max prod,Demand?
(solar action+ wind action)))
11: Demand? get Demand(Demand).
12: Deficit+ = Demand ? (solar action +
wind action+main action)
13: iterations+ = 1;
14: end procedure
15: AverageDeficit = Deficit/iterations;
a stationary policy ?, which is a mapping from state space to
action space that maximizes the following objective:
??
t=0
?tRat(st, st+1), (1)
where at = ?(st), and ? ? [0, 1] is the discount factor.
We model Power Demand as a Markov process. That is,
the current Demand depends only on the previous value. The
Demand value, and the amount of power left in the batteries
form the state of the MDP. That is,
state = [Demand, solar batterylevel, wind batterylevel].
(2)
Based on the current state, the microgrids need to take
decision on the number of units of power to be used from
their batteries, and the number of units of power that is needed
from the main grid. Note that the power from the main grid
is fixed and bounded during all the time periods, while power
from the renewable sources is uncertain in nature.
Action = [solar power, wind power, main power], (3)
The state evolves as follows:
solar batterylevel = solar batterylevel ? solar power
+ solar(),
(4)
and
wind batterylevel = wind batterylevel ? wind power
+ wind(),
(5)
where solar() and wind() are the solar and wind power
generation policies. Our objective is to minimize the expected
long term discounted difference in the demand and supply of
the power. So, the single stage Reward function is as follows:
R = ?(Demand?
(solar power + wind power +main power))2
(6)
When there is uncertainty in the system, like the renewal
energy generation in this case, traditional solution techniques
like value iteration and policy iteration cannot be applied. Re-
inforcement Learning provides us with the algorithms which
can be applied when the model information is not completely
known. One such popular model-free algorithm is Q-learning
[16]. However, microgrids applying Q-Learning independently
is not a feasible solution, as they are working towards a
common goal. Hence we apply co-operative Multi-Agent Q-
Learning algorithm [17] to solve the problem. At every time
slot, the microgrids exchange the battery level information
among themselves. Then they apply Q-Learning on the joint
state and obtain the joint action. Each microgrid then selects its
respective action. Let the joint state at time k be sk. We select a
joint action, based on an ?greedy policy. An ?greedy policy
is one where we select the action that gives maximum reward
with probability 1?  and a random action with probability .
Let it be ak and so we move to a new state sk+1. Let the single
stage reward obtained be rk Then the Q-values are updated as
follows:
Q(sk, ak) = Q(sk, ak)+
?[rk + ?maxaQ(sk+1, a)?Q(sk, ak)],
(7)
where ? ? [0, 1] is the learning parameter and ? ? [0, 1] is
the discount factor.
We update this Q-values until convergence. At the end of
this process, we will have an optimal policy that gives for each
state, the optimal action to be taken. The idea is described in
Algorithm 2.
B. Problem 2 - Balancing Demand-Supply Deficit and cost of
Power Production
In the above formulation, cost of the non-renewable power
production at the main grid site is not taken into consideration.
Therefore, it is natural to use the maximum alloted power from
the main grid and the optimization is done on the amount of
power drawn from the solar and the wind batteries. In this
formulation, we put a cost on amount of power that can be
obtained from the main grid. That is, we modify our single
stage Reward as follows:
?c ? (Demand? (solar power + wind power+
main power))2 + (1? c) ? (main power)2.
c ? [0, 1],
(8)
where c is the parameter that controls the demand-supply
objective and the main grid production cost. Note here that
when c = 1, it is same as the problem 1. In this formulation,
Algorithm 2
1: State ? Initial State
2: get Demand(Demand) : Function that gives next Demand
based on the current Demand.
3: solar() : Function that computes solar power generated in
a time slot
4: wind() : Function that computes wind power generated in
a time slot.
5: max prod : Maximum power alloted by the main grid.
6: Deficit = 0 ; iterations = 0
7: procedure AT EVERY TIME SLOT AND FOR ALL THE
MICROGRIDS
8: Select an joint action a vector according to -greedy
policy.
9: new solar = solar ? a(solar action) + solar()
10: new wind = wind? a(wind action) + wind()
11: new Demand = get Demand(Demand)
12: Update the Q-values according to (7)
13: state = [new Demand, new solar, new wind]
14: Deficit+ = Demand ? (a(solar action) +
a(wind action) + a(main action))
15: iterations+ = 1;
16: end procedure
17: AverageDeficit = Deficit/iterations;
our objective is not only to minimize the demand-supply
deficit, but also maintain a desired average production of
power at the main site. Similar to the above problem, we apply
multi-agent Q-Learning to obtain the optimal solution.
III. EXPERIMENTS
We consider two microgrids operating on the solar and the
wind power batteries respectively. Demand values are taken
to be 8,10 and 12. The probability transition matrix for the
Demand is given below.
P =
?? 0.1 0.6 0.30.3 0.1 0.6
0.6 0.3 0.1
?? . (9)
The maximum storage capacity of the batteries is set to
5. The renewable energy generation process for simulation
purposes is taken to be Poisson with mean 2. Discount factor
of the Q-learning algorithm is set to 0.9.
We begin our simulations with the state [8, 5, 5]. First we
run Algorithm 1 for 106 iterations and compute the average
deficit in demand and supply. Then we run Algorithm 2 for
108 iterations with ?greedy policy with  = 0.85 and obtain
an optimal policy. We then compute the average deficit using
optimal Q-values for 104 iterations. We compare both the
algorithms in Figure 1.
With regard to the problem 2, we plot the values of average
deficit in the power and the average production at the main
grid obtained by different values of c in (8). The maximum
power allocation at the main site is taken to be 8. This is
shown in Figure 2.
Fig. 1. Comparison of Algorithms on Problem 1
Fig. 2. Algorithm 2 applied to Problem 2
A. Observations
• In Figure 1, we see that the Algorithm 1 performs
better than the Algorithm 2, when the Maximum Power
Allocation (MPA) at the main site is less than 3. This
is because, when the MPA is very less compared to the
minimum demand value, storing the power in the batteries
doesn’t provide any advantage.
• On the other hand, if the MPA is not very small and
comparable to the minimum demand, the Algorithm 2
outperforms Algorithm 1. Thus, in this case it is useful
to store the power in the batteries. This is the main result
of our paper.
• In Figure 2, we observe that as the value of c increases,
the average demand-supply deficit decreases and the
average power obtained from the main grid increases.
IV. CONCLUSION
We considered the problem of electrifying a village by
setting up microgrids close to the village. These microgrids
have access to the renewable energy storage batteries and
also electrical connections from the main grid. We identified
two problems associated with the microgrid. First problem is
to minimize the expected long-run discounted demand-supply
deficit. We model this problem in the framework of MDP [1].
This formulation doesn’t take into consideration the cost of
power production at the main grid site. Finally, we formulated
MDP taking the cost of power production into consideration.
We applied Multi-Agent Q-Learning algorithm to solve these
problems. Simulations show that, when maximum power al-
location at the main site is not very less, storing the power in
the batteries and using them intelligently is the better solution
compared to not using the storage batteries.
V. FUTURE WORK
As future work, we would like to consider the possibility of
power sharing between the microgrids. In this case, along with
decision on amount of power to be used from stored batteries,
microgrids also have to make decision on the amount of power
that can be shared with others. We would also like to consider
the heterogeneous power price system. In this scenario, the
price of power production at the main grid will vary from
time to time.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Robert Bosch Centre for
Cyber-Physical Systems, IISc, Bangalore, India for supporting
part of this work.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Kangas and S. Glisic, “Analogies in modelling wireless network
stability and advanced power grid control,” in IEEE International
Conference on Communications (ICC), 2013. IEEE, 2013, pp. 4035–
4040.
[2] “Rural households electrification,” https://garv.gov.in/garv2/dashboard/
main.
[3] H. Farhangi, “The path of the smart grid,” IEEE power and energy
magazine, vol. 8, no. 1, 2010.
[4] G. Weiss, Multiagent systems: a modern approach to distributed artifi-
cial intelligence. MIT press, 1999.
[5] T. Logenthiran, D. Srinivasan, and T. Z. Shun, “Multi-agent system for
demand side management in smart grid,” in IEEE Ninth International
Conference on Power Electronics and Drive Systems (PEDS), 2011.
IEEE, 2011, pp. 424–429.
[6] P. Wang, J. Huang, Y. Ding, P. Loh, and L. Goel, “Demand side load
management of smart grids using intelligent trading/metering/billing
system,” in Power and Energy Society General Meeting, 2010 IEEE.
IEEE, 2010, pp. 1–6.
[7] A.-H. Mohsenian-Rad, V. W. Wong, J. Jatskevich, R. Schober, and
A. Leon-Garcia, “Autonomous demand-side management based on
game-theoretic energy consumption scheduling for the future smart
grid,” IEEE transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 320–331,
2010.
[8] A. Moshari, G. Yousefi, A. Ebrahimi, and S. Haghbin, “Demand-
side behavior in the smart grid environment,” in Innovative Smart
Grid Technologies Conference Europe (ISGT Europe), 2010 IEEE PES.
IEEE, 2010, pp. 1–7.
[9] L. Gelazanskas and K. A. Gamage, “Demand side management in smart
grid: A review and proposals for future direction,” Sustainable Cities and
Society, vol. 11, pp. 22–30, 2014.
[10] A. M. Kosek, G. T. Costanzo, H. W. Bindner, and O. Gehrke, “An
overview of demand side management control schemes for buildings in
smart grids,” in IEEE international conference on Smart energy grid
engineering (SEGE), 2013. IEEE, 2013, pp. 1–9.
[11] I. K. Maharjan, Demand side management: load management, load
profiling, load shifting, residential and industrial consumer, energy
audit, reliability, urban, semi-urban and rural setting. LAP Lambert
Academic Publ, 2010.
[12] P. P. Reddy and M. M. Veloso, “Learned behaviors of multiple au-
tonomous agents in smart grid markets.” in AAAI. Citeseer, 2011.
[13] S. S. S. R. Depuru, L. Wang, and V. Devabhaktuni, “Smart meters for
power grid: Challenges, issues, advantages and status,” Renewable and
sustainable energy reviews, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 2736–2742, 2011.
[14] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction.
MIT press Cambridge, 1998, vol. 1, no. 1.
[15] D. P. Bertsekas, Dynamic Programming and Optimal Control. Athena
Scientific Belmont, MA, 1995, vol. 1, no. 2.
[16] D. Bertsekas, “Dynamic Programming and Optimal Controlvolume 2,”
1999.
[17] L. Busoniu, R. Babuska, and B. De Schutter, “A comprehensive survey
of multiagent reinforcement learning,” IEEE Transactions on Systems
Man and Cybernetics Part C Applications and Reviews, vol. 38, no. 2,
p. 156, 2008.
